COMPOSITE SLABS AND
BEAMS USING STEEL
DECKING:

GOOD PRACTICE FOR
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

                                                                                                                                            1
COMPOSITE SLABS AND
BEAMS USING STEEL
DECKING:

GOOD PRACTICE FOR
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
SCI (The Steel Construction Institute) is the leading, independent provider of technical expertise and
disseminator of best practice to the steel construction sector. We work in partnership with clients,
members and industry peers to help build businesses and provide competitive advantage through the
commercial application of our knowledge. We are committed to offering and promoting sustainable
and environmentally responsible solutions.

Our service spans the following areas:

Membership                                          Consultancy
Individual & corporate membership                   Development
                                                    Product development
Advice                                              Engineering support
Members advisory service                            Sustainability

Information                                         Assessment
Publications                                        SCI Assessment
Education                                           SCI Product Certification
Events & training
                                                    Specification
                                                    Websites
                                                    Engineering software

© 2023 SCI and The Metal Cladding & Roofing         Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of
Manufacturers Association. All rights reserved.     research or private study or criticism or review,
                                                    as permitted under the Copyright Designs and
Publication Number: SCI P300, 3rd Ed.               Patents Act, 1988, this publication may not be
                                                    reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form
ISBN: 978-1 85942-252-6                             or by any means, without the prior permission
                                                    in writing of the publishers, or in the case of
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data.    reprographic reproduction only in accordance
                                                    with the terms of the licences issued by the UK
A catalogue record for this book is available from  Copyright Licensing Agency, or in accordance
the British Library.                                with the terms of licences issued by the
                                                    appropriate Reproduction Rights Organisation
Published by:                                       outside the UK.
SCI, Silwood Park, Ascot,
Berkshire. SL5 7QN UK                               Enquiries concerning reproduction outside
                                                    the terms stated here should be sent to the
T: +44 (0)1344 636525                               publishers, SCI.
F: +44 (0)1344 636570
E: reception@steelsci.com                           Although care has been taken to ensure, to
                                                    the best of our knowledge, that all data and
www.steelsci.com                                    information contained herein are accurate to
                                                    the extent that they relate to either matters of
To report any errors, contact:                      fact or accepted practice or matters of opinion
publications@steelsci.com                           at the time of publication, SCI, the author and
                                                    the reviewer assumes no responsibility for any
                                                    errors in or misinterpretations of such data and/or
                                                    information or any loss or damage arising from or
                                                    related to their use.
SCI PUBLICATION P300

           COMPOSITE SLABS AND
           BEAMS USING STEEL
           DECKING:

                     GOOD PRACTICE FOR
                     DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

                                                                                                                                                                                      i
FOREWORD

Composite construction is popular because it combines structural efficiency with
speed of construction to offer an economic solution for a wide range of building types.
Applications include commercial, industrial and residential buildings.

This guide covers the design and construction of composite slabs and beams and
addresses the good practice aspects of these activities. The practice presented is typical
of the current U.K. market, and has developed over time in order to deliver the best
results. It is therefore recommended that contractual arrangements for specific projects
are aligned with these recommendations. This revision updates the previous MCRMA/SCI
guide, which was published in 2000 and updated in 2009. This second update reflects
the latest guidance for good practice and gives information on design to the Eurocodes
as well as design to BS 5950, including comment on some changes that will be reflected
in the so-called Generation 2 Eurocodes.

The standalone Section related to the design and construction of shallow floor
construction that was contained in previous editions of this publication has been omitted
from this update.

The principal authors of the first two editions of this publication were Dr J W Rackham, Dr
G H Couchman, and Dr S J Hicks, and the principal author of this third edition is Mr L A
Dougherty (all authors previously or currently from The Steel Construction Institute).

Input to the first two editions was received from the MCRMA decking group. Similar
industry input to this third edition has been provided by the BCSA decking group, which
includes the following companies. The contributions of the named representatives are
gratefully acknowledged:

 Mr J Turner                     Structural Metal Decks Ltd.

 Mr C Atkinson                   Kingspan Ltd.

 Mr J Millar and Mr R Cresswell  Severfield (NI) Ltd.

 Mr J Nurser and Mr M Norton     Composite Profiles UK Ltd.

 Mr J Tranmer                    Prodeck-Fixing Ltd.

 Mr A Sowter                     Richard Lees Decking

 Mr M Davies                     Tata Steel

 Mr A Cummins                    Construction Metal Forming Ltd.

 Mr S Lemmon                     Stud-deck services Ltd.

 Mr A Stokoe                     MSW Ltd.

 Mr S Hall                       Hadley Group.

 Dr A Girao-Coelho and Mr P Walker British Constructional Steelwork Association

The preparation of this document was funded by SCI. Previous editions were funded and

commissioned by the Metal Cladding and Roofing Manufacturers Association (MCRMA).

                                                                                                                                             iii
CONTENTS

FOREWORD                                iii  6 CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                       vii  CONCRETE                          97

                                             6.1 Concrete supply               97

1 INTRODUCTION                          1    6.2 Placing concrete              98

1.1 Benefits of composite construction  2    6.3 Loads on the slab during and

1.2 Applications                        3    after concreting                  104

1.3 Scope of this publication           4    6.4 Further reading               106

2 THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION                7 DEMOUNTABLE COMPOSITE

TEAM                                    7    CONSTRUCTION SYSTEMS              109

2.1 Duty holders                        7    8 REFERENCES                      113

2.2 Roles in design and construction    9

2.3 Design and construction sequences 12

3 INFORMATION TRANSFER                  17

3.1 Design stage                        17

3.2 Construction stage                  18

3.3 3D Modelling                        22

4 DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS 25

4.1 Steel decking                       25

4.2 Composite slabs                     37

4.3 Acoustic insulation                 65

4.4 Further reading                     67

5 DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS             71

5.1 Construction stage                  72

5.2 Composite stage                     74

5.3 Shear connection                    82

5.4 Further reading                     93

                                                                               v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This guide covers the design and construction of composite floors, paying particular
attention to the good practice aspects. Following a description of the benefits of
composite construction and its common applications, the roles and responsibilities
of the parties involved in the design and construction process are identified. The
requirements for the transfer of information throughout the design and construction
process are described.
The design of composite slabs and beams is discussed in relation to both the
Eurocodes and BS 5950. Some changes that we anticipate will be introduced in
the Generation 2 Eurocode 4 are presented. In addition to general ultimate and
serviceability limit state design issues, practical design considerations such as the
formation of holes in the slab, support details, fire protection, and attachments to
the slab are discussed. Guidance is also given on the acoustic performance of typical
composite slabs. Typical construction details are illustrated.
The obligations of designers according to the CDM Regulations are identified and
discussed.

                                                                                                                                           vii
       INTRODUCTION

                       Composite slabs consist of profiled steel decking with an in-situ reinforced concrete
                       topping. The decking not only acts as permanent formwork to the concrete, but also
                       provides sufficient shear bond with the concrete so that, when the concrete has gained
                       strength, the two materials act together compositely.
                       Composite beams are normally hot rolled or fabricated steel sections that act
                       compositely with the slab. The composite interaction is achieved by the attachment of
                       shear connectors to the top flange of the beam. These connectors generally take the
                       form of headed studs. It is standard practice in the UK for the studs to be welded to the
                       beam through the decking (known as `thru-deck' welding) prior to placing the concrete.
                       The shear connectors provide sufficient longitudinal shear connection between the
                       beam and the concrete so that they act together structurally. Latest developments use
                       alternatives to welded studs so that the slabs and beams can be separated at end of
                       life in demountable systems.
                       Composite slabs and beams are commonly used in the commercial, industrial, leisure,
                       health and residential building sectors due to the speed of construction and general
                       structural economy that can be achieved. Although most commonly used in steel
                       framed buildings, composite slabs may also be supported off masonry or concrete
                       components. They are also used in conjunction with light steel framing.
                       A typical example of the decking layout for a composite floor is shown in Figure 1.1. The
                       lines of shear connectors indicate the positions of the composite beams.

          Figure 1.1
A typical example
of composite floor

      construction,
 showing decking
 placed on a steel

               frame
                             courtesy of Kingspan

                                                                                                                                                                          1
         INTRODUCTION

                  1.1 Benefits of composite construction

                            Composite construction has contributed significantly to the dominance of steel
                            frames in the commercial building sector in the UK. The main benefits of composite
                            construction are listed below.

                         Speed of construction

                            Bundles of decking can be positioned on the structure by crane and the individual
                            sheets then installed by hand. Using this process, crane time is minimal, and in excess
                            of 400 m2 of decking can be installed by one team in a day, depending on the shape
                            and size of the building footprint. The use of the decking as a working platform speeds
                            up the construction process for following trades. Minimal reinforcement is required,
                            and large areas of floor can be poured quickly. Floors can be concreted in rapid
                            succession. The use of fibre reinforced concrete can further reduce the programme, as
                            the reinforcement installation period is significantly reduced.

                         Safe method of construction

                            The decking can provide a safe working platform and act as a safety `canopy' to protect
                            workers below from falling objects.

                         Saving in weight

                            Composite construction is considerably stiffer and stronger than many other floor
                            systems, so the weight and size of the primary structure can be reduced. Consequently,
                            foundation sizes can also be reduced.

                         Saving in transport

                            Decking is light and is delivered in pre-cut lengths that are tightly packed into bundles.
                            Typically, one lorry can transport in excess of 1000 m2 of decking. Therefore, a smaller
                            number of deliveries are required when compared to other forms of construction.

                         Structural stability

                            The decking can act as an effective lateral restraint for the beams, during construction,
                            provided that the ribs run transversally and the decking fixings have been designed to
                            carry the necessary loads and specified accordingly. The decking may also be designed
                            to act as a large floor diaphragm to redistribute wind loads in the construction stage,
                            and the composite slab can act as a diaphragm in the completed structure. The floor
                            construction is robust due to the continuity that can be achieved between the decking,
                            reinforcement, concrete and primary structure.

                         Shallow construction

                            The stiffness and bending resistance of composite beams means that shallower floors
                            can be achieved than in non-composite construction. This may lead to smaller storey
                            heights, more room to accommodate services in a limited ceiling to floor zone, or

2
more storeys for the same overall building height. This is especially true for shallow
floor forms of composite construction, whereby the beams are integrated within the
slab depth.

Sustainability

Steel has the ability to be recycled repeatedly without reducing its inherent properties.
It also facilitates re-use of structural components. This makes steel framed composite
construction a sustainable solution. `Sustainability' is an increasingly important
factor for clients, and 100% of all steel construction products can be either re-used
or recycled upon demolition of a building. Recent improvements in steel and concrete
technology will enable further significant reductions in the embodied carbon of
composite slabs. See Section 4.2.1 for information on low carbon concrete and Section
7 for information on demountable composite construction systems.

Easy installation of services

Cable trays and pipes can be hung from hangers that are attached using `dovetail'
recesses rolled into the decking profile, thereby facilitating the installation of
services such as electricity, telephone and information technology network cabling.
These hangers also allow for convenient installation of false ceilings and ventilation
equipment (see Section 4.2.8).

The above advantages often lead to a saving in cost over other systems, as reflected in
the market share for composite construction. Cost comparisons are updated quarterly
in Building magazine and called the `Costing Steelwork' series (see Steel construction
news - SteelConstruction.info and Cost comparison studies - SteelConstruction.
info). The cost comparisons show that where steel-concrete composite construction
is used, the cost of the steel composite solution is lower than alternatives when a
comprehensive view is taken.

1.2 Applications

Composite slabs have traditionally found their greatest application in steel-framed
office buildings, but they are also appropriate for the following types of building:

 Commercial buildings
 Industrial buildings and warehouses
 Leisure buildings
 Stadia
 Hospitals
 Schools
 Cinemas
 Housing; both individual and residential buildings
 Refurbishment projects
 Car parks.

                                                                                                                                            3
         INTRODUCTION

                  1.3 Scope of this publication

                            This publication gives guidance on the design and construction of composite slabs
                            and composite beams in order to disseminate all the relevant information to the
                            wide and varied audience involved in the design and construction chain. Guidance is
                            given on design and construction responsibilities, and requirements for the effective
                            communication of information between the different parties are discussed.
                            The principal aim of the guidance given in this publication is to identify the most
                            important issues. The reader is directed elsewhere, including to British Standards,
                            Eurocodes, and SCI publications for detailed design guidance. Summary boxes are
                            used to highlight how to achieve economic, buildable structures through good practice
                            in design.

4
5
THE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION TEAM

The aim of this Section is to identify typical activities and responsibilities for the
team members involved in the design and construction of a building using composite
components. The precise delegation of responsibilities will depend on the details of the
contract for a specific project, with which all parties need to be familiar.
As an overriding principle, the CDM Regulations 2015[1] state that `Every person on
whom a duty is placed by these Regulations in relation to the design, planning and
preparation of a project shall take account of the general principles of prevention in
the performance of those duties during all stages of the project'.

The CDM Regulations require the Duty Holders to ensure that construction projects are
planned, managed and monitored during the pre-construction phase and coordinate
matters relating to health and safety during the construction phase to ensure that,
so far as is reasonably practicable, the project is carried out without risks to health
or safety.

2.1 Duty holders

The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2015 (CDM 2015), came into
force in April 2015.

Virtually everyone involved in a construction project has legal duties under
CDM 2015. These so-called Duty Holders are defined as follows. It can be seen that
these definitions could often apply to more than one party involved in the design
of a building, so where possible subsequent sections of this publication aim to be
more specific.

Client - Anyone who has construction work carried out for them. The main duty for
clients is to make sure their project is suitably managed, ensuring the health and
safety of all who might be affected by the work, including members of the public. CDM
2015 makes a distinction between domestic and commercial clients. The latter have
construction work carried out as part of their business. Commercial clients could be an
individual, partnership or company and includes property developers and companies
managing domestic properties.

Designer - An organisation or individual whose work involves preparing or modifying
designs, drawings, specifications, bills of quantity or design calculations. Designers
can be architects, consulting engineers and quantity surveyors, or anyone who

                                                                                                                                            7
        THE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION TEAM

                             specifies and alters designs as part of their work. They can also be tradespeople
                             if they carry out design work. The Designer's main duty is to eliminate, reduce or
                             control foreseeable risks that may arise during construction work, or in the use and
                             maintenance of the building once built. Designers work under the control of a Principal
                             Designer on projects with more than one Contractor.

                             Principal Designer - A Designer appointed by the Client to control the pre-construction
                             phase on projects with more than one Contractor. The Principal Designer's main duty
                             under CDM 2015 is to plan, manage, monitor and coordinate health and safety during
                             this phase, when most design work is carried out.

                             In this publication the term `Primary Structural Designer' (PSD) is used to describe
                             the person who has the overall responsibility for the design of the building and the
                             term `Specialist Structural Designer' (SSD) is used to describe a person who has
                             responsibility for a specific part of the design, such as the overall responsibility for the
                             design of the decking and slab. Both can be either a Designer or Principal Designer,
                             according to CDM terminology, depending on the number of Contractors on the project.
                             Roles that are identified as being for the PSD in this document may be delegated to an
                             SSD but this must be clearly stated in the contract documents.

                             There is a responsibility in the CDM regulations for Designers to consider the sequence
                             of construction and provide at least one safe erection scheme for a project in which
                             they should consider both the permanent and temporary works in their design[2] .

                             Principal Contractor - A Contractor appointed by the Client to manage the construction
                             phase on projects with more than one Contractor. The Principal Contractor's main duty
                             under CDM 2015 is to plan, manage, monitor and coordinate health and safety during
                             this phase, when all construction work takes place.

                             Contractor - An individual or business in charge of carrying out construction work
                             (e.g. building, altering, maintaining or demolishing). Anyone who manages this work
                             or directly employs or engages construction workers is a Contractor. Their main duty
                             under CDM 2015 is to plan, manage and monitor the work under their control in a way
                             that ensures the health and safety of anyone it might affect (including members of the
                             public). Contractors work under the control of the Principal Contractor on projects with
                             more than one Contractor.

                             Worker - An individual who actually carries out the work involved in building, altering,
                             maintaining or demolishing buildings or structures. Workers include: plumbers,
                             electricians, scaffolders, painters, decorators, steel erectors and labourers, as well as
                             supervisors like foremen and chargehands. Their duties include cooperating with their
                             employer and other duty holders, and reporting anything they see that might endanger
                             the health and safety of themselves or others. Workers must be consulted on matters
                             affecting their health, safety and welfare.

                             A summary of duties under CDM 2015 is available in this link.

 8
2.2 Roles in design and construction

Form of floor construction

The choice of floor construction and the general beam and column arrangements are
the responsibility of the Architect and the PSD. The Architect will be concerned with
more general and spatial aspects of the building form, such as the column locations,
the construction depth of the floors, and the soffit appearance (if it is to be exposed).

The PSD will determine the general loads to be considered in the design of the
structure, based on the type of occupancy for each area specified by the Architect/
Client. Details of any specific loads, for example due to services, may need to be
supplied by others. It is important to avoid over-specification of loads in order to
achieve material efficiency. The PSD will also undertake scheme designs to identify
beam and slab solutions with spanning capabilities to suit the Architect's requirements.

Composite beams

The detailed design of the composite beams (Section 5) is the responsibility of the
PSD, who should recognise that there is an interaction between the beam and slab
design, particularly regarding the decking and transverse reinforcement. In designing
the composite beams, due consideration should be given to the construction stage
load case.

Although it may be necessary to consult the decking manufacturer for practical advice
on shear connector configurations, or if fibre reinforcement is to be used to supplement
or replace fabric reinforcement, it is the responsibility of the PSD to specify the shear
connector type and quantities required.

When considering composite beams, the Designer should be aware of practical
considerations such as the access requirements for using stud welding equipment
(see Section 5.3.1) and minimum practical flange widths for sufficient bearing of the
decking and subsequently slab (see Section 4.1.4). These requirements may have
serious implications on the economy of the chosen solution.

Composite slab

The design of the composite slab (Section 4) may be the responsibility of either the
PSD or an SSD (the decking manufacturer/supplier). Contract documents should
make this clear for a given project. Particular attention should be paid to areas where
there are special loads, such as vehicle loads and loads from solid partitions and
tanks. Construction stage loads should also be considered at the design stage, with
particular attention paid to any concentrated loads from plant or machinery required
to carry out the safe erection of the building and its structure (see Section 6.3 for
further information). When designing and detailing any reinforcement, the SSD should
ensure that the specified bars can be located within the available depth of slab and

                                                                                                                                            9
        THE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION TEAM

                             that the correct reinforcement cover depths for the design durability conditions can
                             be achieved.

                             It is recommended that the PSD prepares general arrangement drawings (which
                             may be in digital form) for the slab, in addition to the steelwork general arrangement
                             drawings. In particular, these drawings should define the edges and thickness of
                             the slab, and they should form the basis of the decking layout drawings and the
                             reinforcement drawings.

                             The PSD and the SSD should work closely together to make sure all the reinforcement
                             requirements, including those for the beams, are covered and shown in the
                             reinforcement schedule. A reinforcement layout drawing should be produced for each
                             bay of each floor. The reinforcement grade, location, lengths, minimum overlaps
                             and minimum concrete cover should be shown (and appropriate information about
                             fibres if they are to be used). On site, these drawings will be used to check that all
                             the reinforcement has been fixed correctly (or fibres, both type and dosage, correctly
                             incorporated). Bar bending schedules showing the type, size and number of bars
                             required should be included, so they can be used by the concrete Contractor to procure
                             the reinforcement.

                             Designing a concrete mix to provide the structural and durability performance
                             defined in the specification produced by the PSD is normally the responsibility of the
                             Principal Contractor.

                          Choice of decking

                             The choice of decking and its general arrangement is the responsibility of the PSD. The
                             design must consider the fire resistance of the slab (which may depend on the decking
                             type), the ability of the decking and composite slab to resist the applied loading, any
                             propping requirements, and the deflections at both the construction and in-service
                             (composite) stages. As well as influencing all of these, the choice and orientation of
                             decking profile may have implications for the composite beam design.

                             Design software, or load-span information, provided by a decking manufacturer will
                             normally be used to verify the decking, as its performance is complex and certain
                             design parameters are best determined from tests. The PSD must be satisfied with
                             the information supplied in this form by the SSD (decking supplier/manufacturer)
                             and ensure that it is not used `out of context'. Consultation with the decking supplier/
                             manufacturer is recommended if there is any doubt. Where decking is specified for
                             unusual applications, the `standard' design information may not be directly applicable
                             (see Section 4).

                          Decking arrangement and details

                             The decking layout drawings (Section 3.2) are normally prepared by the Contractor
                             who will fix the decking, acting as an SSD. Details should be checked by the PSD,
                             who should advise the SSD of any special requirements, such as the need for extra

 10
fixings when the decking is required to act as a wind diaphragm, or of any particular
requirements concerning the construction sequence. The PSD should check that the
proposed bearing details and the interfaces with the other elements of construction
are practicable, and that they permit a logical, buildable sequence.

In preparing the decking layout drawings, the decking Contractor may find it beneficial
to refine the design. For example, it may be necessary to change some of the
continuous spans to simple spans for practical reasons. This may have implications
for any propping requirements during construction so on-going information exchange
is essential.

The loads that may be applied to the decking in the construction condition, both
as a temporary working platform and as formwork, should be clearly indicated on
the decking layout drawings or general notes. The loads that may be applied to the
composite slab should be shown on the load layout drawings (these will be included
in the Health and Safety File for reference throughout the lifetime of the building). It is
therefore essential that all loading assumptions and design criteria are communicated
to the decking Contractor.

Temporary works

Propping should generally be avoided because it reduces the speed of construction
and therefore affects the construction sequence and economy. When propping is
unavoidable, it is usually necessary to prop through several floors to support the
prop loads. This can prevent other operations over a large area. However, when the
construction sequence permits, propping does increase the spanning capability
of the decking and may allow a reduction in materials. Determining the propping
requirements is generally the responsibility of the PSD (normally using information
supplied by an SSD), although local propping needs may change when the SSD details
the decking layout. The SSD should be satisfied that the decking can withstand the
concentrated loads from the propping arrangement below, which typically consists of
timbers bearers 75 mm to 100 mm wide.

The location of lines of props or other temporary supports should be shown on the
decking layout drawings. The design and installation of the propping system is the
responsibility of the Principal Contractor, and propping systems should be braced
appropriately. Removal of props should not be carried out before the concrete has
reached its specified strength, or, when specified in the contract, before the PSD gives
explicit approval.

In addition, the PSD should supply the Principal Contractor with the propping loads,
and the dead load that has been considered, to help them to draw up the propping
scheme. When devising the scheme, consideration must be given to the fact that floors
will need to be designed to carry the concentrated loads from props (see Section 6 for
advice on possible loading). Further advice on propping is given in Section 4.2.7.

                                                                                                                                           11
        THE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION TEAM

                          Fire protection
                             The Architect is normally responsible for defining the fire resistance period required for
                             the building, in order to satisfy Building Regulations' requirements, and for choosing
                             the type of fire protection. The PSD, who may delegate to a specialist, is responsible
                             for the specific details of the fire protection. The PSD should also make it clear on the
                             drawings when any voids between the profiled decking and the steel beams have to be
                             filled (see Section 5.2.3). In some cases, a qualified fire expert (acting as SSD for that
                             specific activity) will need to perform these roles.
                          Safety
                             Whilst all parties involved in the design and construction process are required to
                             consider construction safety, the CDM co-ordinator has some specific obligations
                             under the CDM Regulations[1]. [It is to be noted that the post of Planning Supervisor
                             established under the previous Regulations has been revoked and replaced by the post
                             of CDM co-ordinator.] These obligations include the creation of the Health & Safety
                             Plan and the Health & Safety File.

                   2.3 Design and construction sequences

                             The following flowcharts describe typical design (Figure 2.1) and construction
                             (Figure 2.2) sequences for composite floor construction.

 12
       Figure 2.1
    Sequence of
design activities

                                                                                                                                                                     13
        THE DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION TEAM

                Figure 2.2
             Sequence of
             construction

                  activities
 14
15
16
INFORMATION
TRANSFER

Clear and timely communication of information is important given that several parties
are involved in the building design process (see Section 2 for identification of typical
responsibilities). There are also obligations placed on the key parties under the CDM
Regulations[1] to exchange information during both design and construction.

3.1 Design stage

The design of composite beams and slabs is clearly influenced by spanning
requirements, and the loads that are to be supported. In addition to grid layouts, it
is therefore important that accurate details of all the loads (including construction
stage) are established at an early stage. Unfortunately, some information, such as the
loads due to the services, is often unavailable when needed, and the PSD has to use
conservative values in order to give flexibility when the services are designed at a later
stage. Such overdesign results in excessive use of material, and therefore excessive
embodied carbon. Future designs will need to address this source of conservatism as
the sector strives to use less material.

Knowledge of the position of services is also important, because it enables account to
be taken of any opening requirements in the beam webs and/or slabs. Openings can
have a significant effect on the resistance of a member.

The following list is a guide to the information required to design the composite slabs
and beams:

 Column grid and beam general arrangement
 Position of slab edges
 Static and dynamic imposed loads (to include consideration of any temporary

     concentrated loads from plant/machinery that may be required during
     construction)
 Services and finishes loads
 Type of finishes (which may affect the reinforcement needed to control cracking)
 Special loads (e.g., walls, wind diaphragm loads)
 Fire resistance period
 Decking type (re-entrant or trapezoidal)
 Slab depth limitations
 Minimum mass requirements (for acoustic performance)
 Location of openings

                                                                                                                                           17
INFORMATION TRANSFER

                                  Requirements for soffit appearance and general exposure
                                  Requirements for service fixings
                                  Requirements for cladding attachments (which may affect the slab edge detailing)
                                  Construction tolerances (including requirements for the upper surface of slabs)
                                  Deflection limits
                                  Propping requirements or restrictions
                                  Any known restrictions on the use of thru-deck welding.
                                 In order to prepare the decking layout drawings, an SSD will also need to know the:
                                  Concrete type and grade
                                  Shear connector layout and details
                                  Cladding support method (for edge trim design, etc.).
                                 There are also specific issues of information transfer that arise because the design of
                                 the decking and composite slabs often relies on the use of information presented in
                                 decking manufacturers' literature or incorporated into their software. It is important
                                 that explanatory information associated with software and literature is comprehensive.
                                 For example, in load-span tables the following points should be clear:
                                  Are the loads that are given unfactored, or factored design values?
                                  What are the assumptions concerning ponding of concrete (e.g. is pouring to a

                                      constant slab thickness assumed)?
                                  What allowances, if any, have been made for service loads etc.?
                                  What fire performance do the tables relate to?
                                  Do specified reinforcement (fabric, bars or fibres) requirements imply any crack

                                      control capability?
                                  Do the tables imply adequate serviceability behaviour as well as resistance, and if

                                      so, what limiting criteria have been assumed?
                                 If the slab design is split between the PSD and the design service of a decking
                                 manufacturer (SSD), it is essential that there is clear communication of all relevant
                                 design information including the specific design codes to be used.

                     3.2 Construction stage

                                 An absence of comprehensive information transfer between the design and
                                 construction teams can lead to delays or, at worst, incorrect or unsafe construction.
                                 The site personnel should check the information provided and confirm that it is
                                 complete, passing any relevant information to appropriate contractors. Any variations
                                 on site that might affect the design should be referred to the PSD.

      18
Decking layout drawing

The layout drawings should be available for those lifting the decking, so that the
bundles can be positioned correctly around the frame to minimise risk during
installation and reduce manual handling. Clearly, they should also be available for
the deck laying team so that the bundles are loaded out in accordance with the deck
layout drawings.

Although different decking contractors' drawing details may vary slightly, the drawings
should show (in principle) each floor divided into bays, where a bay is an area that is
to be laid from a bundle as one unit. Bays are normally indicated on the drawing using
a diagonal line. The number of sheets and their length should be written against the
diagonal line. The bundle reference may also be detailed against this diagonal line.
Further construction notes for the bay can be referenced using numbers in circles
drawn on the diagonal lines. Figure 3.1 shows an example of a decking layout drawing,
but with the shear connectors and fastener information omitted for clarity. Decking
contractors' literature should be referenced for exact details.

The approximate starting point for laying the decking should be given on the drawings,
together with the direction in which laying should proceed. All supports (permanent
and temporary) should be identified, and whether they should be in place prior to laying
the decking. The letters TP on the drawings typically indicate lines of propping. Column
positions and their orientation should also be shown. The decking type, thickness and
material strength should be indicated on the drawing.

The location of all openings trimmed with steelwork, and all slab perimeters, should
be given relative to the permanent supports. This may be in the form of a reference
box titled `Edge Trim', with a reference number (for details shown elsewhere), the slab
depth, and the distance from the edge of the slab to the centre line of the nearest
permanent support, but decking contractors' literature should be referred to for the
exact drawing details.

The shear connector layout should also be shown on the decking drawings, or on
separate drawings for reasons of clarity. The information should include the type of
shear connector, its length, orientation (if shot-fired) and position relative to the ribs.
The minimum distance between the centre-line of the shear connector and the edge
of the decking is typically given in a standard detail. Details of preparation, fixing and
testing of shear connectors should be available on site. For more information on shear
connection, refer to Section 5.3 and BCSA Code of Practice for Metal Decking and
Studwelding[3].

                                                                                                                                           19
INFORMATION TRANSFER

                     Figure 3.1
              Typical decking
               layout drawing
               with the shear

                     connector
                 and fastener
                   information

                        omitted
                                         courtesy of SMD
                                 Fastener information should be given on the drawings. The fastener type for both
                                 seams and supports should be given, along with maximum spacings (or minimum
                                 number of fasteners per metre). Where the PSD has designed the decking to act as
                                 an effective lateral restraint to the beams and more or stronger fasteners than used
                                 in a manufacturer's normal fixing arrangement are necessary, this should be clearly
                                 indicated on the decking layout drawing and/or general notes. Prior to stud welding,
                                 the fasteners must also resist wind loads on the decking.

      20
The general notes should include the design loads that the decking can support in the
construction condition. Guidance on avoidance of overload prior to placing the concrete
is given in Reference 3.

A copy of the decking layout drawings must be given to the Principal Contractor so that
checks can be made that the necessary propping is in place. The Principal Contractor
will also need to refer to these drawings for details of the maximum construction
loading and any special loading.

Decking bundle identification

An identification tag should be attached to each bundle of decking delivered to site.
The tag will normally contain the following information:

 Number of sheets, their lengths and thickness
 Total bundle weight
 Location of floor to receive bundle
 Deck type
 Bundle unique identification.

Product information on the decking should also be available on site, including the
height of the ribs and their spacing, and other technical information.

Information required for laying the reinforcement, casting the slab and its use
thereafter

Unless concrete reinforcement is provided uniquely by fibres, a reinforcement layout
drawing should be prepared for each bay of each floor by the PSD. The location,
length, minimum overlap and minimum concrete cover of all reinforcement should
be indicated. The grade of all reinforcement should also be noted. This grade can be
checked against the identification tag for each reinforcement bundle delivered to site.
Appropriate information about fibres should be given, if they are to be used.

Important reinforcement details (such as at construction joints, support locations,
openings and edges) should be referenced and placed on this drawing.

The floor slab general arrangement drawings (or the Specification) should include
the concrete performance requirements or mix details (including any details for fibre
reinforcement), surface finish requirements, level tolerances and any restrictions on
the location of construction joints. They should also identify the minimum concrete
strength at which temporary supports may be removed, the minimum concrete strength
at which temporary construction loads may be applied, and, where appropriate, the
maximum allowable vehicular axle weight (for punching shear). Minimum concrete
strengths may be given in terms of days after concreting.

Propping information

As discussed in Section 2.2, the PSD should supply the Principal Contractor with the
floor dead load value to allow a propping solution to be developed.

                                                                                                                                           21
INFORMATION TRANSFER

                     3.3 3D Modelling

                                 3D modelling can be used for all sizes of project and can be particularly beneficial if a
                                 project has some unusual aspects. It may also be necessary simply because it is the
                                 approach adopted by other parties for a given project. There can be many advantages
                                 to using 3D models, including design visualisation, clash detection and the production
                                 of drawings (Figure 3.2).
                                 The visualisation aspect assists in identifying issues that may only otherwise be
                                 spotted during the installation stage on site, such as level inconsistencies, or support
                                 issues that would have required rectification through the late provision of trimming
                                 steel or additional welding during the deck installation. When needs are identified
                                 early, supports can instead be applied during fabrication. A 3D model allows the
                                 engineer to view the deck and stud layout as it would be installed on site and confirm
                                 that it is in accordance with their design.
                                 The model can also be used to identify any potential clashes. Some clashes may have
                                 been small enough to rectify on site, for example by notching around a column in a
                                 run of decking. However, spotting significant clashes before arriving on site, such as
                                 clashes with steelwork due to level inconsistencies, or clashing with an existing wall,
                                 means they can be resolved early and delays avoided.
                                 The steelwork contractor, design engineer and various sub-contractors may each have
                                 their own model, which may be requested by any of the other parties to facilitate the
                                 benefits listed above. A decking model is created by the decking manufacturer/supplier
                                 and is set out specifically, so it lays directly onto the steelwork contractor's or main
                                 contractor's model using a common coordination point.
                                 Typical 3D modelling software such as Tekla Structures has an integrated system which
                                 creates drawings based on the views created within the model space. A rendered
                                 model can be created which can show the materials with the correct lighting and
                                 texture to give a good indication of how it will look on-site, as can be seen in Figure 3.2.

      22
                        Model

                        Deck GA

                        Rendered Model

          Figure 3.2
         Image of a
     3D model, GA
drawing, rendered
model and picture
    of the installed

                 deck
                        Installed Deck Picture
                             courtesy of MSW Ltd
                                                                                                                                                                         23
24
DESIGN OF DECKING
AND SLABS

This Section provides information about design principles and procedures, codified
design rules, and guidance on good practice in design and detailing. Along with Section
5, it is aimed primarily at the PSD, and any SSD. Summary boxes are used to highlight
particular issues of good practice, or areas where particular attention is needed.

4.1 Steel decking

The steel decking (referred to as sheeting in the Eurocodes) has two main structural
functions:
 During concreting, the decking supports the weight of the wet concrete and

     reinforcement, together with the temporary loads associated with the construction
     process. It is normally intended to be used without temporary propping
 In service, the decking acts `compositely' with the concrete to support the loads
     on the floor. Composite action is obtained by shear bond and mechanical interlock
     between the concrete and the decking. This is achieved by the embossments rolled
     into the decking ­ similar to the deformations formed in rebar used in a reinforced
     concrete slab - and by any re-entrant parts in the deck profile (which prevent
     separation of the deck and the concrete).

The decking may also be used to stabilise the beams against lateral torsional buckling
during construction, and to stabilise the building as a whole by acting as a diaphragm
to transfer wind loads to the walls and columns. If required it must be explicitly
designed to achieve the intended role, in particular with regard to the adequacy of the
fixings; see references 4 and 5 for recommendations on wind loading and design of
temporary fixings. The decking, together with either welded fabric reinforcement placed
in the top of the slab or steel/synthetic fibres throughout the slab (see Section 6.2.1),
also helps to control cracking of the concrete caused by shrinkage effects.

4.1.1 Decking profiles

Decking is produced by a number of manufacturers in the UK. Although there are
similarities between their profiles, the exact shape and dimensions depend on the
particular manufacturer. There are two generic types of so-called shallow decking: re-
entrant (dovetail) profiles and trapezoidal profiles. An indicative example of a re-entrant
decking profile is shown in Figure 4.1. Indicative examples of trapezoidal decking
profiles are shown in Figure 4.2.

                                                                                                                                           25
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                         The traditional shallow decking profiles are between 50 to 80 mm deep, with a rib
                                         spacing usually of 150 to 333 mm. This type of decking typically spans 3 m to 4.5 m,
                                         leading to frame grids that are multiples of 3 m or 4 m spacing, for which temporary
                                         propping is usually not required. Some manufacturers also offer profiles in excess of
                                         80 mm deep, the deepest of which can span 6 m unpropped as a simply supported
                                         member. Such so-called deep decking profiles, which are over 200 mm deep, are mainly
                                         used in shallow floor construction, where the steel beams are integrated into the depth
                                         of slab.

                               Figure 4.1
                       Example of a re-
                       entrant decking

                                    profile

                               Figure 4.2
                            Examples of
                             trapezoidal
                       decking profiles

                                         Some trapezoidal profiles include a single stiffener in the centre of each trough,
                                         whereas others have two stiffeners. The advantage of two stiffeners is that a stud can
                                         be placed centrally in the trough, whereas a single stiffener means that studs have to
                                         be placed off centre (see Section 5.3.1 for further information).
                                         The height of the steel decking hp is defined as the height to the shoulder of the profile,
                                         even if the profile has a re-entrant detail on the top flange. So, for the 80 mm deep profile,
                                         shown in Figure 4.2, hp = 80 mm. When checking the fire resistance of composite slabs
                                         with trapezoidal decking, the slab thickness criterion for insulation performance excludes
                                         the height of the stiffener (re-entrant detail) on the top flange, the thickness of concrete
                                         in this instance is hs ­ hp, where hs is the depth of the slab. However, when checking the
                                         depth of concrete that can act structurally above a transverse deck, the presence of the
                                         top flange stiffener does need to be taken into account. The overall height of the profile

                 26
including the top flange stiffener is taken as hd and the thickness of concrete hc in this
instance is hs ­ hd. For profiles that do not have top flange stiffener, hd = hp.

See links below for details of some manufacturers' specific profiles:

1. Richard Lees Decking
2. Tatasteel
3. Kingspan Structural Products
4. Structural Metal Decks Ltd.
5. Construction Metal Forming Ltd.

The grades of steel used for decking are specified in BS EN 10346:2015[6]. The most
common grade in the UK is S350 although S450 is also available from several
manufacturers (the designation identifies the yield strength of the steel in N/mm2
or MPa).

Decking is generally rolled from 0.9 to 1.2 mm thick steel sheet (note this thickness
includes that of the galvanising). The spanning capability of a given decking profile
clearly increases as the steel thickness increases, however span increases are not
in direct proportion to the strength. The steel is normally galvanized before forming,
generally to a specification of Z275 which denotes 275 grammes of zinc per m2.
This results in a thickness of approximately 0.02 mm per face (and is sufficient to
achieve an excellent design life in internal applications with mild exposure conditions).
Alternative metallic coatings according to BS EN 10346:2015 are available, for example
the high durability, zinc, aluminium and magnesium (ZM) coatings. These may be
used where improved durability is required without increasing the coating thickness,
which facilitates thru-deck welding. For example, Magnelis® ZM120 with a coating
mass of 120g/m2 is equivalent to Z275 with a thickness of 0.01 mm per face and
Magnelis® ZM310 with a coating mass of 310g/m2 is equivalent to Z600 and has a
thickness of 0.025mm per face. Alternatively, thicker zinc coatings of 350 g m2, and up
to 600 g/m2, are available but may have extended lead times and require a minimum
quantity order. Thru-deck welding of shear studs is not recommended for galvanised
decking with more than 350 g/m2 of zinc coating because of the risk of substandard
weld quality[7] , and in this case shot-fired connectors, such as Hilti X-HVB, may be
considered. Polyester paints are sometimes applied over the galvanizing to provide a
longer service life and have the advantage of prolonging the lifespan of the floor. Advice
should be sought from the supplier/manufacturer when decking is to be used in a
moderate or severe environment. Further advice on the use of composite construction in
an aggressive environment is given in AD247[8], which despite its age it is still relevant.

  Standard thickness galvanizing (275 g/m2) will give an excellent design life in
  most internal applications. High durability, zinc, aluminium and magnesium (ZM)
  coatings are available where improved durability is needed with a similar coating
  thickness to the standard galvanised coating to avoid precluding
  thru-deck welding.

                                                                                                                                           27
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                  4.1.2 Design for resistance

                                          The temporary construction stage usually governs the choice of decking profile.
                                          When designing to Eurocodes, the construction loading that should be considered
                                          in the design of the decking is defined in BS EN 1991-1-6:2005[9] and its National
                                          Annex. Although the provisions are a little unclear in the Eurocode itself; the following
                                          is understood to be the recommended construction loading, which should be treated
                                          as a variable load. As can be seen below, this interpretation is also consistent with the
                                          guidance given in BS 5950-4:1994:
                                          i. 0.75 kN/m2 generally
                                          ii. 10% slab self-weight or 0.75 kN/m2, whichever is greater, over a 3 m x 3 m

                                                `working area'. This area should be treated as a moveable patch load that should
                                                be applied to cause maximum effect.
                                          This is shown diagrammatically in Figure 4.3, which shows the load scenario for a
                                          single span condition.

                               Figure 4.3
                             Loading on
                         decking at the
                    construction stage
                     to BS EN 1991-1-

                                  6:2005
                                          When the deck is continuous over a temporary or permanent support this must be
                                          considered when designing the decking profile[10]. The `working area' construction load
                                          should be moved to the most onerous place to cause maximum effect as shown in
                                          Figure 4.4.

                               Figure 4.4
                             Loading on
                         decking at the
                    construction stage
                         for continuous

                                    decks

                 28
When designing to BS 5950-4[11], the construction loading is defined as:

 A uniformly distributed load of 1.5 kN/m2 acting over one span. For spans less
     than 3 m, the load should be increased to 4.5/Lp, where Lp is the effective span of
     the decking

 A reduced load of 0.5 kN/m2 on adjacent spans.

It is worth noting that, regardless of codified values, it may be prudent for the
construction imposed load to be increased when fibre reinforced concrete is used. Not
only may the fibre reinforced concrete be less fluid (so more prone to heaping), but the
absence of reinforcing fabric means that the construction loads from operatives will be
transferred directly to the decking.

The construction loads must be considered in addition to the self-weight of the slab
(usually 2 to 3 kN/m2), which may need to include an allowance for `ponding' of
the concrete (see Section 4.1.3). Care must be taken so that site practice reflects
the assumptions made in design, as concrete thickness is used in the calculation
of deflections of the decking and the supporting beams. Pouring the concrete to a
constant thickness over the supporting beams will ensure that any excess volume
(and therefore weight) is limited to the ponding values associated with deflection of
the decking itself, and where necessary allowed for in design software. If the concrete
is poured to achieve a flat upper surface then the beam deflections will also result in
extra concrete.

The above load values allow for construction operatives, impact, the heaping of
concrete during placing, hand tools, and small items of equipment and materials for
immediate use. The loads are not intended to cover excessive impact or excessive
heaping of concrete, pipeline or pumping loads.

For design to the Eurocodes, densities of the wet weight of reinforced concrete are
given in BS EN 1991-1-1:2002[12] , and the data is classified as `informative'. The data
is for heavily reinforced construction associated with conventional reinforced concrete
structures. The UK NA states that those values may be used, but it is recommended
that the density of dry concrete used in composite floor construction should be
24 kN/m³ for normal weight concrete and 19 kN/m³ for lightweight concrete,
increased to 25 kN/m³ and 20 kN/m³ respectively for wet concrete. The weight of
the reinforcement should be added separately. The self-weight of the wet concrete is
treated as a variable load for the construction condition, but the reinforcement may be
considered as a permanent load.

In BS 5950-4, wet densities are given as 2400 kg/m3 and 1900 kg/m3 for normal and
lightweight concrete respectively, and similarly 2350 kg/m3 and 1800 kg/m3 for dry
concrete. The self-weight of the wet concrete is treated as a dead load.

Where construction equipment such as a power float is required to be used before
the concrete has gained full strength, it is recommended that this additional loading
does not exceed the allowable temporary construction loading of 1.5kN/m2 over the

                                                                                                                                           29
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          3 m × 3 m `working area' (this approach is conservative as it ignores any strength that
                                          may be present in the concrete and resulting onset of composite action), see section
                                          6.3.2 for further information.

                                          Further information on the design actions during concreting and the recommended
                                          expressions for combinations can be found in AD 346[13] and AD 367[14].

                                          The design of decking is covered in BS EN 1993-1-3:2006[15]. Some deeper profiles
                                          are outside the scope of this document, so the rules should be applied with care. The
                                          moment resistance of the section is established using an effective width model to
                                          take account of the slender steel elements in compression. Stiffeners (in the form of
                                          folds) are often introduced into the decking profile to increase the effectiveness of the
                                          section. The effective width approach is relatively conservative because the section
                                          behaviour is very complicated owing to local buckling, and so the section properties
                                          can be predicted neither easily nor accurately. The design of the decking is also
                                          covered in BS 5950-4 and BS 5950-6[11], where a similar approach is given.

                                          As an alternative to analytical procedures, the Standards also allow the use of testing
                                          in order to determine the performance of the decking. Spans 10% to 15% in excess
                                          of the limits predicted by simple elastic analysis using effective section models are
                                          possible. For this reason, manufacturers generally determine section properties
                                          for use in software and load-span tables that are based on tests rather than on an
                                          elastic analysis approach. The tests should cover all relevant configurations and
                                          failure modes, noting that for continuous spans resistance to combined loading over
                                          intermediate supports is often critical. This is particularly the case for design to BS EN
                                          1993-1-3:2006, which introduced an SLS verification as well as ULS.

                                          In addition to tests under simulated uniform loading, further tests are normally
                                          carried out to check the resistance of the decking to localised loading. This provides
                                          information on the resistance to local loading from above as well as on the maximum
                                          allowable prop and support forces.

                                             Decking design based on testing is more economical than design based on
                                             analytical models. Manufacturer's (empirical) information should therefore be used
                                             whenever possible.

                                             Empirical information must not be used for designs outside the scope of the
                                             tests on which it is based. Load-span tables will generally only cover uniformly
                                             distributed loading.

                                  4.1.3 Design for serviceability

                                          It is necessary to limit the deflections at the construction stage to limit the volume of
                                          concrete that is placed on the decking; excess deflections will lead to `ponding' of the
                                          concrete, and this will increase the dead loads on the structure. Deflection limits for
                                          the decking are given in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004[16], and in BS 5950-4. According to BS

                 30
EN 1994-1-1:2004, if the central deflection of the decking  is greater than 1/10 of the
slab thickness, ponding should be allowed for. In this situation the nominal thickness
of the concrete over the complete span may be assumed to be increased by 0.7.

For the serviceability limit state, the recommended value of the deflection s,max of steel
decking under its own weight plus the weight of wet concrete is the span/180 in BS EN
1994-1-1:2004. In BS 5950-4, the limit on the residual deflection of the soffit of the
deck (after concreting) is also given as span/180 (but not more than 20 mm), which
may be increased to span/130 (but not more than 30 mm) if the effects of `ponding'
are included explicitly in the design. The deflection of the steel decking has an impact
on the surface flatness/level that can be achieved, so where tight surface tolerances
are specified tighter deflection limits are likely to be needed.

The limits given in standards may be increased `where it can be shown that greater
deflections will not impair the strength and efficiency of the slab', although this is rarely
applied. As a further check, it is recommended that the increased weight of concrete
due to ponding should be included in the design of the support structure if the
predicted deflection, without including the effect of ponding, is greater than one tenth
of the overall slab depth.

The requirement for verification of the profiled decking at SLS in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004
is expressed simply in terms of deflection under the weight of wet concrete and there
is no requirement to check that such deflection should be elastic. However, it is
recommended that there is also a check to ensure that there is no premature local
buckling of the profile under the weight of wet concrete and the construction loading, to
prevent irreversible deformation. This applies particularly to the intermediate support
regions of continuous spans.

  Excess deflections of the decking (and beams) may lead to `ponding' of the
  concrete and therefore increased self-weight of the slab. The decking and propping
  requirements should be chosen to minimise ponding. Excess deflections may also
  affect the ability to achieve tight tolerances for the upper surface of the slab.

4.1.4 Supports

Minimum bearing length

The bearing length is the longitudinal length of decking or slab in direct contact
with the support. In each case, this length should be sufficient to satisfy the
following relevant criteria. For decking, it should be sufficient to avoid excessive rib
deformations, or web failure, near the supports during construction. For the slab, it
should be sufficient to achieve the required load carrying capacity of the composite
slab in service.

                                                                                                                                           31
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          The recommended minimum bearing lengths shown in Figure 4.5 should be observed.
                                          The values given in this figure are based on the requirements of BS EN 1994-1-1:2004,
                                          but similar requirements are given in BS 5950-4. These limits should also be respected
                                          for temporary supports. The limits given represent nominal values that should be
                                          considered in the design and detailing, i.e., they include an allowance for construction
                                          deviations leading to slightly reduced values on site.

                                          The recommended bearing lengths and support details differ depending upon the
                                          support material (steel, concrete, etc.), and they are different for interior and exterior
                                          (end) supports.

                                          Typical values and details are given in Figure 4.5 for the following:
                                           Steel or concrete supports - Composite slabs on steel or concrete supports should

                                                have a minimum end bearing length of 75 mm for the slab, and a minimum end
                                                bearing length of 50 mm for the decking (see Figure 4.5(a) and Figure 4.5(b)).
                                                For continuous decking, the minimum overall bearing length should be 75 mm.
                                                When two discontinuous sheets bear onto a steel beam flange, the minimum
                                                bearing distance should be increased to 60 mm (i.e., requiring a 120 mm support
                                                width) to ensure that minimum distances associated with detailing around the
                                                shear studs can be achieved (these concern the distance from the stud to the
                                                edge of the flange, and the distance from the stud to the end of the sheet, the
                                                combination of which is greater than the bearing required for the decking).
                                           Masonry and other support types - Composite slabs on supports made of materials
                                                other than steel and concrete should have a minimum end bearing length of 100
                                                mm for the slab and a minimum end bearing length of 70 mm for the decking (see
                                                Figure 4.5(c) and Figure 4.5(d)). For continuous decking, the minimum overall
                                                bearing length should be 100 mm.

                                          The flange width of supporting steel beams should be sized to provide the minimum
                                          bearing, by assuming that erection tolerances sum up unfavourably.

                                          Details of how the decking should be fixed to supports are given by BCSA in
                                          Reference 3.

                                          If `thru-deck' welding of the studs is to be used to anchor the decking, for example so
                                          that it may contribute to the transverse shear reinforcement (see Section 5.3.2), the
                                          dimensions specified in Figure 4.5 may need to be increased (see Figure 5.10).

                                          In cases where the slab must transfer wall loads from one storey to the next (rather
                                          than simply sitting on the top of a wall), the relatively lower volume of voids in a slab
                                          formed using a re-entrant profile means it may be better able to satisfy the design
                                          requirements because the trough width in contact with the supporting surface is larger
                                          than that of a trapezoidal profile.

                 32
       Figure 4.5
        Minimum
bearing lengths
 for permanent
        supports

                  Recommended support details

                    In addition to the most common detail of a slab bearing on a steel beam or wall,
                    there are a number of other commonly occurring support conditions which need to
                    be considered at the design stage in order to avoid problems or delays on site. Some
                    typical details are shown in Figure 4.6.

                    There are two basic cases at the interface of the decking with beams; where end
                    support is required (Figure 4.6(a)), and where side support is required (Figure 4.6(b)).
                    In both cases a steel `shelf angle' is normally detailed as the decking support, and
                    it is preferable to fix this during fabrication. Angle flashing can be used provided its
                    adequacy is confirmed by structural design. To enable fixing of the decking, particularly
                    in the case of an end support, it is important that the leg of the angle extends a
                    minimum of 50 mm beyond the flange of the beam. To facilitate execution increasing
                    this dimension to 75 mm is advised in some situations. The support angles should
                    be continuous and extend as close as is practical to the beam end connections, to
                    minimise the unsupported length of the decking.

                    Support is also required when the decking interfaces with a concrete or masonry wall.
                    This may be provided by attaching a steel angle, flashing, or timber batten to the wall,
                    preferably by using cast-in fixings (Figure 4.6(c)). Provision may need to be made to
                    achieve reinforcement continuity between the wall and slab.

                                                                                                                                                                     33
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                              Figure 4.6
                      Decking support
                     details at a beam

                           web and at a
                           concrete wall

                                          The decking should not cantilever beyond a support more than 600 mm (or ¼ of the
                                          span, if less) when spanning perpendicular to it. When the decking is spanning in a
                                          parallel direction, no cantilever is possible without extra support being provided ­
                                          although the edge trim may cantilever a short distance (see Section 4.2.6).
                                          The decking may also need to be supported around penetrations which reduce, or
                                          prevent, the effective bearing. Supports should be provided as part of the permanent
                                          steelwork, for example in the form of cleats or angles. Examples of when such supports
                                          are necessary include when the decking is penetrated by columns that are greater
                                          than 250 mm wide (without incoming beams on both axes), or by columns supported
                                          off beams. Note this 250 mm dimension applies when the penetration runs along
                                          the edge of the decking, but when there is a penetration against the end it should be
                                          reduced to 50 mm. Figure 4.7 shows a recommended detail using a shelf angle to
                                          support the decking around a column.

                               Figure 4.7
                       Decking support

                             details at a
                            column web
                 34
                        A less common detail is one in which the column is supported by a beam, in which
                        case special detailing may be required to achieve sufficient bearing for the decking
                        around the perimeter of the column. Where the deck is spanning in a direction
                        perpendicular to the beam, the minimum bearing of 50 mm required to support the
                        end of the decking may not be available because of the presence of the column base
                        plate. Therefore, the beam flange may need to be extended by welding plates to the
                        sides at the column position, as shown in Figure 4.8(a). If the column position does
                        not coincide with a butt joint in the decking, the continuous decking sheet may have to
                        be cut to fit around it. At this position, the decking should then be treated as if it was
                        simply supported, and props may be required locally. A similar situation may arise when
                        flange splice plates are fixed to the top of the steel section, as shown in Figure 4.8(b).
                        Supports may also be needed if the decking is to be penetrated by temporary
                        works structures (depending on the size of the penetration). To avoid problems in
                        such situations, it is vital that there is good communication between the Principal
                        Contractor, who is responsible for the temporary works, and the PSD, who should
                        specify the appropriate steelwork.

           Figure 4.8
    Decking details
   where a column
 is supported off a
beam and where a
beam flange plate

               occurs
                        The decking should be cut to fit around any penetration. A typical detail, with a column,
                        is shown in Figure 4.9.
                        If temporary propping is proposed as a support around a penetration, this will clearly
                        only be present during the construction stage, i.e., to support the decking.

                                                                                                                                                                         35
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                               Figure 4.9
                           Typical detail

                              of decking
                   installation around

                                a column
                                                     courtesy of SMD
                                          The completed slab may then need to include additional reinforcement, as might
                                          be necessary around any untrimmed opening in a reinforced concrete slab (see
                                          Section 4.2.6), in order to support the in-service loads. This reinforcement should be
                                          specified by the PSD.

                                      Sheet lengths
                                          BS EN 1090-4:2018[17] specifies the functional tolerance in the sheet lengths for
                                          decking up to 3 m in length as +10 mm and ­ 5 mm. A positive tolerance may result
                                          in accumulations in length when sheets are butted in a long run. Long sheets could
                                          lead to the butt joint positions becoming increasingly displaced thus giving inadequate
                                          bearing for the sheets near the end of a run. Cutting on site might be needed to
                                          overcome this problem. It is, therefore, easier for the decking to be installed when
                                          sheets are slightly short and good practice would be to aim for +0 mm. A small gap
                                          between sheets above the supporting beams is of no structural significance.
                                      Preformed ends
                                          Preformed ends (sometimes called `engineered ends' or `crushed ends') are the
                                          result of the process of closing the ends of the steel sheet deck by compressing the
                                          rib to create a slope at the end of the decking and forming a trapezoidal shape with a
                                          flat `toe' at either end of the panel. An example is shown in the Figure 4.10. Decking
                                          profiles with preformed ends are used in single span conditions. The advantages of
                                          using preformed ends include:
                                           Reduces the installation time in single span situations as it means that no end

                                                caps need to be fitted, saving labour costs
                                           Avoids the need for acoustic or fire profile fillers
                                           Stud resistance may be increased because less volume of concrete is `removed'

                                                ahead of the studs than when transverse ribs run across the beam (and, according
                                                to Eurocode 4, a reduction factor kt must be applied). With preformed ends the
                                                concrete around the studs is similar to that found in a solid slab, or when (wide)
                                                parallel ribs are present.

                 36
                     There are also some disadvantages, including:
                      Implications on sheet bundling and layout configurations.
                      The vertical shear resistance of the decking may be reduced because the process

                          of compressing the rib to create a slope potentially reduces the proportion of
                          decking contributing to the shear resistance (those parts that are `vertical').
                          However, the design of single span decking is normally governed by limits placed on
                          the allowable deflection, so any reduction in shear capacity is unlikely to be critical.
                      The necessary bearing width may be affected by the form of the decking ends.
                          As this will be dependent on geometry, the particular manufacturer should
                          be consulted.

     Figure 4.10
Preformed ends

                          courtesy of Kingspan

             4.2 Composite slabs

                     Composite slabs are normally used to span between 3 m and 4.5 m onto supporting
                     (downstand) beams or walls. The ability of the decking to support the construction
                     loads, without the need for temporary propping, generally dictates the maximum
                     span that can be achieved (longer spans are possible when props are used to avoid
                     the construction stage being critical). Slab thicknesses are normally in the range of
                     100 mm to 250 mm for shallow decking. When deep decking is used to span between
                     shallow floor beams, the slab span is typically 6 m and depth, in the range of 280 mm
                     to 320 mm.
                     When the concrete has gained sufficient strength, it acts in combination with the
                     tensile strength of the decking to form a `composite' slab. It can be considered as a
                     reinforced concrete slab, using the decking as external reinforcement.
                     The load carrying capacity of composite slabs is normally dictated by the (mechanical)
                     shear bond between the decking and the concrete, rather than by yielding of the
                     decking. From tests, it is known that this shear bond generally breaks down when a
                     `slip' (relative displacement between the decking and the concrete) of 2 to 3 mm has

                                                                                                                                                                     37
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          occurred at the ends of the span. In practice, this will not occur below ultimate load
                                          levels. An initial slip, which is associated with the breakdown of the chemical bond,
                                          may occur at a lower level of load. The interlock resistance that is relied upon in design
                                          is therefore solely due to the performance of the embossments in the deck (which
                                          cause the concrete to `ride-over' the decking), and the presence of re-entrant parts in
                                          the deck profile (which prevent the separation of the deck and the concrete).

                                          Information on improving the bending resistance of composite slabs by providing
                                          additional reinforcement, or end anchorage such as shear connectors to further control
                                          slip, can be found in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-4.

                                          If the slab is unpropped during construction, the decking alone resists the self-weight
                                          of the wet concrete and construction loads. Subsequent loads are applied to the
                                          composite section. If the slab is propped, all of the loads have to be resisted by the
                                          composite section. Surprisingly, this can lead to a reduction in the imposed load that
                                          the slab can support, because the applied horizontal shear at the decking-concrete
                                          interface increases. However, for both unpropped and propped conditions, resistances
                                          well in excess of loading requirements for most buildings can be achieved.

                                          Composite slabs are usually designed as simply supported members in the normal
                                          condition (i.e. at ambient temperature), with no account taken of the continuity offered
                                          by any reinforced concrete that is continuous over the supports. Two methods of design
                                          are generally recognised, both of which use empirically derived information on the
                                          `shear bond' resistance of the slab from uniformly distributed loading arrangements.
                                          The more traditional method, and one which is given in both BS EN 1994-1-1:2004
                                          and BS 5950-4, is the so-called `m and k' method (see Section 4.2.3). However, this
                                          method has limitations and is not particularly suitable for the design of slabs subject
                                          to concentrated line and point loads. An alternative method of design is included
                                          in the Eurocode, which is based on the principles of partial shear connection. This
                                          method provides a more logical approach to determine the slab's resistance. It is likely
                                          that the `m and k' method will not be retained in the Generation 2 BS EN 1994-1-1,
                                          as by now all manufacturers know the shear bond properties needed to apply the
                                          partial connection method for their decks. It is not normally necessary for designers
                                          to understand the design methodology in detail, as manufacturers normally present
                                          the design data in the form of load-span tables or software. Tables are normally only
                                          applicable for uniformly loaded conditions.

                                  4.2.1 Concrete

                                      Concrete types

                                          Both normal weight concrete and lightweight concrete are used in composite slabs,
                                          but in the Eurocodes, these are now referred to as normal concrete and lightweight
                                          aggregate concrete respectively. Normal concrete is made using dense aggregates.
                                          Lightweight aggregate concrete contains artificially produced aggregates such as
                                          expanded pulverised fuel ash pellets. The cement and water contents are higher in

                 38
                          lightweight concrete because of the absorption of water by the aggregate. For normal
                          weight concrete, strength classes C25/30, C28/35 or C32/40 are normally chosen;
                          for lightweight concrete, strength classes LC25/28, LC28/31 or LC32/35 are typical.
                          Some of these strength classes are not specified in EN 1992-1-1:2004[18] or BS
                          EN 206:2013[19] but are in the complementary British Standard BS EN 8500-1[20].
                          Designers should be aware that different codes cover different classes.

                          Lightweight concrete has the obvious advantage that (typically) 25% weight savings
                          can be made and provide economic benefit for the overall design of the structure and
                          its foundations (see Section 4.1.2 for concrete densities used for design). Lightweight
                          concrete also has better fire insulating qualities than normal weight concrete, and so
                          thinner slabs may be possible when the `fire condition' criterion of insulation governs
                          the slab design (see Section 4.2.5). Unfortunately, lightweight concrete is not always
                          readily available, and is more expensive than normal weight concrete. Also, it may not
                          be appropriate if it is to be used in heavily trafficked areas; to achieve a good wearing
                          surface, the finishing process must cover the particles of lightweight coarse aggregate
                          with an adequate, well-trowelled dense surface mortar layer. It also has poorer sound
                          insulation properties than normal weight concrete.

                          Lightweight concrete offers several performance advantages, but it is not always
                          readily available and is more expensive.

                          Low Carbon Concrete

                          So-called low carbon concrete may be used to significantly reduce the embodied
                          carbon in a structure, although care is needed to ensure all properties of such material
                          are satisfactory. All concretes to BS 8500 are based on Portland cement, or CEM1, but
                          mostly contain additions, or other cementitious materials. These include:

                           Ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS)
                           Fly ash
                           Silica fume
                           Limestone powder
                           Pozzalana.

                          These additions have a much lower embodied carbon than CEM1. Table 4.1 gives an
                          indication of the savings that can be achieved by different alternatives.

               Table 4.1  Broad designation of     Percentage of addition         Embodied CO2
Embodied CO2 of UK        cement type in concrete                                 kgCO2/m3 of concrete
concretes complying       CEM1                     0                              283
with BS 8500 (based       IIA                      6 ­ 20                         228 ­ 277
on a cement content       IIB                      21 ­ 35                        186 ­ 236
                          IIIA                     36 ­ 65 GGBS                   120 ­ 198
         of 320 kg/m3     IIIB                     66 ­ 80 GGBS                   82 ­ 123
           of concrete).  IVB                      36 ­ 65 fly ash for pozzalana  130 ­ 188

                                                                                                            39
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          To supplement concretes in accordance with BS 8500, most of the larger concrete
                                          producers have low carbon proprietary concretes. These are formulated to keep the
                                          embodied carbon down to a given level and may therefore be particularly interesting to
                                          the specifier. Although the potential benefits may be significant, care is needed when
                                          specifying alternatives to concrete covered by BS 8500. This is because concrete tends
                                          to be specified on the basis of compressive strength alone (other than any special
                                          requirements for pouring etc). However numerous other concrete characteristics will, or
                                          could, affect the behaviour of composite construction; including:

                                           Tensile strength
                                           Long-term behaviour
                                           Fire behaviour (loss of strength with temperature and insulation)
                                           Density
                                           Rate of strength gain.

                                          The relationships between these various characteristics are only guaranteed, such that
                                          the material can be specified on the basis of compressive strength alone, for concrete
                                          mixes complying with BS 8500.

                                          Therefore, any designer, sub-contractor or manufacturer considering using concrete
                                          that is not covered by the scope of BS 8500 ­ whether to reduce carbon or for any
                                          other reason - should ensure that all relevant properties are known for the concrete
                                          they are considering, and justify the assumed performance of the composite
                                          construction. Doing this correctly, in consultation with all relevant parties involved
                                          in the design, material supply and construction of the project, should ensure that
                                          significant benefits are achieved without structural performance being compromised.
                                          For further information see Low carbon concrete ­ what you need to know[21].

                                      Concrete grade

                                          The PSD chooses a concrete specification that is suitable for the intended application.
                                          This specification is normally chosen on the basis of the:

                                           Overall structural requirements
                                           Floor finish, if any, to be placed on the slab
                                           Exposure conditions.

                                          The concrete strength class designations according to BS EN 206:2013 and BS 8500-1
                                          relate to the characteristic strength (95% probability of being exceeded) achieved after
                                          28 days. This is the strength that would be found in a cylinder or cube test. The cylinder
                                          strength is about 80% of the strength of a 150 mm cube. Design standards provide
                                          rules that relate the design strength to the concrete grade.

                                          As a minimum, concrete of strength class C25/30 or LC25/28 should be specified. In
                                          the case of concrete used as a wearing surface, the minimum strength class should be
                                          C28/35 (although C32/40 is preferred).

                 40
Surface finishes

There are two basic performance conditions; concrete to be used as a wearing surface,
and concrete that is to be covered by raised floors, screeds, carpets, tiles, sheet
vinyl, etc. When the concrete is to be used as a wearing surface, the concrete is first
power floated. The specification should then require the slab to be allowed to stiffen
for a short time prior to power trowelling, which compresses and polishes the surface
material, resulting in a harder and more durable surface. Recommendations for power
floating and power trowelling are given in BS 8204[22] and Concrete Society Technical
Report 34[23].

When the concrete is not to be used as a wearing surface, it is recommended that a
wood floated, skip floated or power floated finish is specified.

Drying

Because the concrete is only exposed on the upper surface of a composite floor, it can
take a longer period than a traditional reinforced concrete slab to dry out. If moisture
sensitive floorings and/or adhesives are to be applied, many months may be needed
before the slab is sufficiently dry to accept them. Measures such as the specification
of special concrete, dewatering or surface vapour-proof membranes, may need to be
considered if inadequate time for drying is allowed in the contract programme.

If surface vapour-proof membranes are used, moisture will be trapped in the slab.
This trapped moisture will not be detrimental to the concrete or the decking, as the
steel in contact with the concrete is prevented from corrosion by its high pH. Although
sometimes considered, the provision of small holes, perforations, in the decking to
aid drying is ineffective; the area represented by the holes is insufficient to have any
significant effect on drying times.

AD 163[24] provides additional guidance on provisions for water vapour release.

Level and flatness

Construction tolerance specifications available for composite floor slabs are BS EN
13670:2009[25], which is adopted by NSCS[26], and BS 8204-2. Information taken from
all three is presented in Table 4.2. NSCS Basic or BS 8204-2 SR3 are considered as
a default. If a tighter tolerance than Basic or SR3 is required, then a stiffer structure
may need to be considered. This could result in a combination of larger steel sections,
shorter deck spans, more frequent support columns and or heavier gauge steel
decking. Where a strict control to datum is required, it is suggested that the defection
of the steel design be limited to 10 mm. The deviation in surface flatness is determined
by measuring the maximum gap beneath a straight edge laid on the surface. For
composite slabs, the straight edge must always be positioned parallel to the supporting
beams, i.e. perpendicular to the decking span.

                                                                                                                                           41
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                                   NSCS      BS EN 13670        BS 8204-2

                                               Basic Ordinary Non- Moulded SR3  SR2        SR1

                                                             moulded

                             Permitted global

                             deviation (mm)    12        9   15       9   10    5          3
                             under a 2 m

                             edge

                             Permitted local

                             deviation (mm)    5         3   6        4   na    na         na
                             under a 200 mm

                             edge

                             Difference in

                             height across a   na        na  na       na  2     2          0

                             joint (mm)

                Table 4.2    Notes:
      Flatness defined       SR1 is unlikely to be achievable on suspended floors of any construction.
    by deviation under       SR2 may be achievable on parts of a composite floor, but will not be achievable over all of a floor, owing to
                             deflections. This is a tight flatness tolerance and high levels of workmanship are required to achieve SR2
        a straight edge      on any type of suspended floor.
                             SR3 may be achievable over most of a floor, depending on the deflections of the supporting beams.

                             For floor slabs used by manual handling equipment, tighter tolerances may be required
                             as specified in TR34. Some modern applications require even tighter tolerances, for
                             example to facilitate the smooth running of robots in distribution centres. However, it
                             is recommended that a precisely level and flat concrete floor is not specified unless it
                             is absolutely necessary. When tamping rails are used, noting they are not so common
                             in current practice, they are usually positioned along the support beams, which deflect
                             under the self-weight of the finished floor. To achieve greater accuracy, it is necessary
                             to estimate the central deflection of the beams and to set the tamping rails along
                             each beam to allow for this deflection. This can result in errors because, in practice,
                             the beams may not deflect as much as expected (e.g., because of the stiffness of
                             the beam-to-column connections). It is reasonable to set the rails on the basis that
                             the beams will deflect 30% less than predicted by simple theory. Within the span
                             of the decking the slab depth will increase as the decking deflects ­ however this
                             increase is likely to have been accounted for in the design through consideration of
                             so-called ponding. Dipping is a more effective way of achieving constant thickness, and
                             commonly used.

                             In propped construction, further deflection occurs on removal of the props. Subsequent
                             deflections will be greater the earlier the props are removed (due to the lower stiffness
                             of the `immature' concrete). Therefore, props should not be removed until the concrete
                             has reached 75% of its design strength.

                             As deviations in level of the upper surface are dependent on the deflection of the
                             decking and the supporting beams, tolerances within which these deviations must lie
                             should only be specified at points where there is negligible deflection of the supporting
                             structure, i.e., at columns. The Principal Contractor will be able to do little to correct
                             matters if deviations exceed tolerances specified at other points.

42
The following tolerances are recommended, for verification only at such points in the
structure:

Top surface of concrete, level to datum  ± 15 mm

Top surface of supporting steel beams, level to datum ± 10 mm

Specifying a uniform thickness, rather than level of the upper surface, is the preferred
solution. It means that the self-weight of the concrete will remain close to that
assumed in the design.

Further information on level and flatness can be found in AD 344[27], AD 410[28],
TR75[29] and Concrete advice sheet No. 65[30].

4.2.2 Reinforcement

4.2.2.1 Bar and fabric (mesh) reinforcement

Types and details

Reinforcement in composite slabs usually takes the form of a relatively light welded
fabric, supplemented by bar reinforcement where required. The fabric reinforcement is
required to perform a number of functions:

 Provide bending resistance over internal supports of the slab in the fire condition
     (this reinforcement is usually ignored under `normal' load conditions)

 Reduce and control cracking at the supports, which occurs because of flexural
     tension and differential shrinkage effects

 Distribute the effects of localised point loads and line loads (see Section 6.3.2)
 Strengthen the edges of openings (see Section 4.2.6)
 Act as transverse reinforcement for the composite beams (see Section 5.3.2).

The most common fabric sizes are A142 and A193 (using designations according to
BS 4483[31]), with the numbers indicating the cross-sectional area (mm2) of reinforcing
bars per metre width. The fabric is normally manufactured in `sheets' that are 2.4 m
wide and 4.8 m long. `A' type fabric has layers of bars equally spaced in both directions
(known as `square' fabric) and is most commonly used. It is possible to order special
fabric with heavier wires or closer spacing in one direction, such as `B' or `C' type
fabrics. `B' type `structural' fabrics have longitudinal bars at 100 mm centres and
transverse bars at 200 mm centres. These can be used when highly reinforced areas
are required for structural or fire resistance purposes. `C' type `highway' fabrics are
intended for highway use and have only very light reinforcement in the transverse
direction. C type fabrics should not be used in composite floors.

Fabric sizes less than A142 are not recommended because of their poor
performance as fire reinforcement and inability to control shrinkage. They are
considered as non-structural.

                                                                                       43
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          Bar reinforcement may be used to supplement the fabric:

                                           To achieve longer fire resistance periods
                                           To reinforce the slab around significant openings
                                           When additional transverse reinforcement is needed
                                           To achieve greater crack control.

                                          Reinforcement should comply with BS 4483[31] (fabric) or BS 4449[32](bar) and the
                                          detailing of it should be in accordance with BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 or BS 8110[33]
                                          and BS 8666[34]. Bar reinforcement is produced in three ductility grades: A, B or C.
                                          As noted in Section 2.1.1 and 5.6.3 of BS EN 1992-1-1:2004, to ensure that the
                                          reinforcement has sufficient ductility for plastic analysis, Class B or Class C should be
                                          specified (B being the most common). The ductility grade of the reinforcement has no
                                          effect on the lap and anchorage lengths. The bars in fabric supplied to BS 4483 are
                                          ribbed, and this will reduce the required anchorage lengths compared to plain bars.
                                          BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 assumes that bars are ribbed, but BS 8110 allows for the use of
                                          ribbed and plain bars.

                                          In shallow composite slabs, the reinforcement should be supported sufficiently high
                                          above the top of the decking to allow concrete placement around the bars. When the
                                          slab depth does not allow this, the effect of localised loss of anchorage over the crests
                                          of the deck should be taken into account. The required cover to the upper surface
                                          depends on the concrete class and the exposure. Recommendations are given in
                                          Table A.4 and A.5 of BS 8500-1. The PSD should determine the relevant exposure
                                          condition for the top of the floor, considering the following:

                                           For a floor in a dry protected environment, e.g., in enveloped buildings such as
                                                offices, the exposure class for the concrete is XC1

                                           For an external floor exposed to high levels of humidity, the exposure class for the
                                                concrete would be XC3 or XC4

                                           For a floor exposed in a marine environment, the exposure class would be XS1,
                                                XS2 or XS3

                                           For a floor that is exposed to freeze-thaw cycles, the exposure class would be XS
                                                (see BS 8500-1 for recommendations for this class).

                                          Table A.4 in BS 8500-1 applies where the intended working life is 50 years and
                                          Table A.5 applies where the intended working life is 100 years (which is not normally
                                          applicable to buildings).

                                          In car parks, where the slab is exposed to chlorides and freeze-thaw attack, the
                                          exposure class is XD3 or, if the intended design life does not exceed 30 years, the
                                          exposure class is XF3 or XF4, provided that the concrete surface is protected by an
                                          effective, durable and long-lasting waterproof membrane. Any membrane should be
                                          a waterproof coating that prevents the ingress of water containing dissolved de-icing
                                          salts into the concrete, including at any joints and cracks in the concrete.

                 44
                      Recommended covers for XC1 and XC3/4 exposure classes are given in Table 4.3.
                      Reference should be made to BS 8500-1 for covers and concrete specifications for
                      other exposure classes.

                      The recommendations for durability in this section only relate to the concrete
                      and reinforcement. The corrosion protection of the metal decking is covered in
                      Section 4.1.1

                      Aggregate Type                Normal weight                            Lightweight

                      Concrete Strength        C25/30 C28/35 C32/40 C35/45 C40/50 LC25/28 LC28/31 LC32/35
                      Class

                      Max water cement ratio 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.50 0.45 0.65 0.60 0.55

                      Min cement content for   260  280  300  320  340  260                  280          300
                      20 mm aggregate (kg/m3)

                      Min cement content for   280  300  320  340  360  280                  300          320
                      14 mm aggregate (kg/m3)

                      Min cement content for   300  320  340  360  360  300                  320          340
                      10 mm aggregate (kg/m3)

                      Nominal cover in mm to reinforcement according to the exposure level:

                      XC1                      25 25 25 25 25           25                   25           25

                      XC3/4                    45 40 35 35 30           45                   40           35

           Table 4.3  Notes:
           Concrete   (a) These values are taken from BS 8500-1 and BS EN 206
    properties and    (b) The exposure conditions are defined in BS 8500-1. For internal floors inside enclosed buildings,
    reinforcement
 cover for various              with dry conditions the exposure condition would be XC1. For floors subject to high humidity or
levels of exposure              cyclical wet and dry conditions the exposure condition would be XC3/4. More severe exposure
                                conditions may be applicable in some conditions, e.g., car parks.
                      (c) Nominal Cover: BS 8500-1 lists minimum covers not nominal covers. The nominal covers listed in
                                Table 4.3 are the minimum covers given in BS 8500-1 plus a fixing tolerance (c) of 10 mm. The
                                covers listed are for an intended working life of 50 years. For an intended working life of 100 years
                                no change is required to the XC1 exposure class covers.
                      (d) In practice, nominal covers less than 30 mm with light fabrics are not recommended owing to
                                practical difficulty in supporting the light fabric in the correct location.
                      (e) The listed covers are for durability purposes. Greater covers may be needed for fire resistance
                                considerations

                      Recommended tension laps and anchorage lengths for welded fabric and bars for
                      design to BS 8110 are given in Table 4.4, and for design to BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 in
                      Table 4.5.

                      Traditional practice in the UK uses any continuity over the supports, combined with a
                      small contribution from the decking in the span, to provide composite slab hogging and
                      sagging moment resistances that are sufficient to support the loads in a fire situation.
                      When there is no physical continuity at the slab ends the sagging resistance alone will
                      not be sufficient to resist loads in a fire unless bars are placed in the troughs to act as
                      an additional lower layer of reinforcement and ensure adequate sagging resistance.
                      The Generation 2 BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 provides the facility to consider shorter
                      anchorage lengths when the stress in reinforcing bars is below yield. For situations
                      with uniform loading, or predominantly uniform loading, it can be concluded that
                      straight bars placed in the troughs with no special provision for end anchorage will be
                      adequate. As with all composite elements, when the loading is heavily non-uniform,
                      specific checks should be carried out. For further information see AD note 461[35]

                                                                                                               45
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                             Aggregate Type                             Normal           Lightweight

                             Strength Class                             C20/25 C25/30 C28/35 LC28/35 LC32/35 LC32/40

                             Reinforcement Type          Wire/Bar Type

                             Grade 500 Bar of            Deformed       44d 40d 38d 56d  54d  50d
                             diameter d                  Type 2

                             A142 Fabric (6 mm wires Deformed           275 250 250 350  325  300

                             at 200 mm centres)          Type 2

                             A193 Fabric (7 mm wires Deformed           300 275 275 400  375  350

                             at 200 mm centres)          Type 2

                             A252 Fabric (8 mm wires Deformed           350 325 300 450  425  400

                             at 200 mm centres)          Type 2

                             A393 Fabric (10 mm wires Deformed          440 400 375 550  550  500

                             at 200 mm centres)          Type 2

               Table 4.4     Notes:
        Recommended          (a) Table 4.4 is based on information given in BS 8110-1[33], assuming fully stressed bars/fabric. It should

            tension laps          be noted however that the recommendations determined in accordance with
        and anchorage             BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 (as shown in Table 4.5, below) may differ from the above.
    lengths for welded       (b) Where a lap occurs at the top of a section and the minimum cover is less than twice the size of the
    fabric and bars to            lapped reinforcement, the lap length should be increased by a factor of 1.4.
                             (c) Deformed Type 2 Bars/Wires: Bars with transverse ribs of substantially uniform spacing, which
                BS 8110           protrude beyond the main round part of the bars/wires. There may be longitudinal ribs. Note: The
                                  majority of deformed high yield reinforcement available in the UK is Type 2.
                             (d) The minimum Lap/Anchorage length for bars and fabric should be 300 mm and 250 mm respectively.

                                                                        Reinforcement in tension, bar diameter, d (mm)

                                                         Bond       8   10 12 16 20 25 32 40

                                                         condition

                             Anchorage    Straight bars  Good           230 320 410 600 780 1010 1300 1760
                             length, lbd  only           Poor           330 450 580 850 1120 1450 1850 2510
                                                         Good           320 410 490 650 810 1010 1300 1760
                                          Other bars

                                                         Poor           460 580 700 930 1160 1450 1850 2510

                                          50% lapped in Good            320 440 570 830 1090 1420 1810 2460

                                          one location Poor             460 630 820 1190 1560 2020 2590 3520
                                          (6 = 1.4)
                             Lap

                             length, l0 100% lapped Good                340 470 610 890 1170 1520 1940 2640

                                          in one location Poor          490 680 870 1270 1670 2170 2770 3770
                                          (6 = 1.5)

                  Table 4.5  Notes:
Recommended tension          (a) Nominal cover to all sides  25 mm, [i.e. 2  1]. At laps, clear distance between bars  50mm
                             (b) 1 = 3 = 4 = 5 = 1.0. For the beneficial effects of shape of bar, cover and confinement see
    laps and anchorage
      lengths for welded          Eurocode 2, Table 8.2
       fabric and bars to    (c) Design stress has been taken as 435 MPa. Where the design stress in the bar at the position from

BS EN 1992-1-1:2004               where the anchorage is measured, sd, is less than 435 MPa the figures in this table can be factored
    in C25/30 concrete            by sd/435. The minimum lap length is given in cl 8.7.3 of Eurocode 2
                             (d) The anchorage and lap lengths have been rounded up to the nearest 10 mm
                             (e) Where 33% of bars are lapped in one location, decrease the lap lengths for `50% lapped in one
                                  location' by a factor of 0.82
                             (f) The information in this table is taken from How to design concrete structures to Eurocode 2 . This
                                  publication should be consulted for further guidance
                             (g) The figures in this table have been prepared for concrete class C25/30; for other classes see
                                  Reference 36 or use the following factors for other concrete classes.

                             Concrete class      C20/25 C28/35 C30/37 C32/40 C35/45 C40/50 C45/55 C50/60
                             Factor
                                                 1.16 0.93          0.89 0.85 0.80 0.73 0.68 0.63

46
4.2.2.1 Fibre reinforcement

Fibre reinforcement consists of short fibres made from steel, polypropylene or a
combination of both, which are mixed into the concrete prior to placement. Under
controlled circumstances, fibres may be substituted for some or all of the fabric
reinforcement. Use of fibre reinforcement results in a three-dimensional reinforced
concrete composite slab. Only steel fibres are used for structural applications,
polypropylene fibres are primarily used to control plastic shrinkage cracking and BS EN
1992-1-2 suggests the addition of polypropylene fibres as one of the methods used to
reduce spalling for high strength concrete[37].

The performance of fibre reinforcement is verified empirically, specifically for fire
resistance and for longitudinal shear transfer, using the same testing regimes that are
used to validate the use of traditional reinforcement within steel deck composite floors.

Considerable benefits can be achieved using fibre reinforcement, including a reduction
in labour costs and a saving on the construction programme. The requirement for
longitudinal shear reinforcement to composite beams, in the form of bars or fabric, can
be dramatically reduced and only a minimal amount of fabric reinforcement need be
purchased, transported and stored. There is less usage of the crane as there are fewer
lifting operations. The installation of the floor is easier and safer because there is less
reinforcement to obstruct the floor working area to handle, fix and check, and this can
reduce installation times by up to 20%.

Independent testing has shown that fibre reinforcement systems can provide an
equivalent or superior performance to traditional welded wire fabric solutions,
although local reinforcement may be necessary in locations of concentrated loads.
Fibre reinforcement provides resistance to plastic shrinkage, settlement cracking and
toughness, but the level of performance is related to the specific fibre.

BS EN 14889[38] covers the requirements for fibres used as concrete reinforcement.
BS EN 14889-1:2006 covers steel fibres, and BS EN 14889-2:2006 polymer fibres.
Care should be taken when selecting fibres as a replacement for traditional fabric
reinforcement in steel deck composite slabs.

It is very important to note that fibre reinforced composite slabs are not a generic
product. A specific type and dosage of fibres must be used according to the fibre
manufacturer's specification for a particular slab, and other fibres cannot be
substituted. Provided they are correctly specified, they are unlikely to change the
situation commonly found when fabric is used, whereby the construction stage
governs. If the fibres are not already in a ready mixed concrete when delivered to site,
care should be taken to ensure their effective mixing and even distribution during
pouring. It can be difficult to control and check the even distribution of fibres. Although
offsite mixing is associated with high quality control, contractors and suppliers should
ensure that every effort is made for checking the quality of the pour and the even
distribution of fibres in the concrete mix during construction of the slab[39].

                                                                                                                                           47
                                                                                  WWW.STEEL-SCI.COM

SCI Tedds Modules

Resistance of Composite Slabs to Concentrated Loads

SCI has released the next module in our range of specialist        allowance for `nominal reinforcement without design' when
SCI Tedds modules. This, and other modules in the                  loads are below a certain value has been wrongly interpreted
range, complement and extend the capability of the widely          in the past.
recognised Tekla Tedds software.
                                                                   The procedure allows for optimisation of the effective
SCI is uniquely placed to produce such tools with over             widths of the slab assumed to support the concentrated
30 years of experience in providing information and global         load, finding the best compromise between longitudinal and
expertise to the construction sector.                              transverse requirements. The process may also be used
                                                                   to justify existing transverse reinforcement provision when
This new Module: SCI -- Resistance of Composite Slabs              an `unexpected' load, such as that from a MEWP or similar
to Concentrated Loads is available now and implements a            vehicle, is applied.
new calculation procedure, produced by SCI (it is described
in SCI Advisory Desk notes AD 450 & AD 477), which                 This module makes it quick and easy to apply this new
determines the reinforcement required in a composite slab          procedure and will have credibility with checking authorities
subject to one or more concentrated loads. Importantly, and        and warranty providers due to its SCI provenance.
as described in the AD notes, it should be used to check
all situations with concentrated loads as the Eurocode                                                             Image courtesy of SMD

The SCI is committed to helping the steel construction industry                   +44 (0)1344 636501
meet design, manufacture, installation and commercial objectives.
                                                                                  teddsmodules@steel-sci.com
                  48

                                                                   Click or Scan
                                                                   for more info
More information on fibre reinforcement is given in Section 6.2.1. Further guidance on
the use of steel or macro-synthetic fibre-reinforced concrete can be found in Concrete
Society Technical Reports No. 34, 63[40] and 65.

  Fibre reinforcement is normally provided within the concrete that is delivered and
  ready to pump on site. This can reduce installation times by up to 20%.

4.2.3 Design for resistance

The performance of a composite slab with a particular decking profile can only be
assessed readily by testing. Test procedures are set out in both BS EN 1994-1-1:2004
and BS 5950-4. Sufficient tests must be undertaken to provide information covering
the full range of application. The specimens are first subject to dynamic load (5,000
load cycles up to 1.5 times the working load are specified in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004,
but 10,000 cycles are required by BS 5950-4). Following this, a static load is applied
and increased until failure occurs. The objective of the dynamic part of the test is to
break any adhesion bond, so that only the more stable mechanical interlock remains.
It is anticipated that the Generation 2 EN 1994 will recognise that far fewer than 5,000
cycles are needed to achieve this objective, and the requirement will be adjusted
accordingly.

The test procedure is such that all loads are applied to the composite section to
simulate a uniformly loaded condition. The test results are then presented in terms
of empirical constants, either (m and k) or Tau (), that can be used to quantify the
interaction between the steel and concrete.

As far as slab design for a specific project is concerned, the PSD will not undertake
tests to determine the m and k or Tau () factors. These constants are used by the
decking manufacturers themselves in their software, or in load-span tables for
uniformly loaded conditions for their specific products.

Concentrated line or point loads pose a particular problem for composite slabs
because only part of the slab can be mobilised to support them. One of the issues
with concentrated loads is that the width of longitudinal strip (in the direction of the
slab span) that is assumed to carry the load can become quite large, when the load is
near to mid-span. Such a width may require significant reinforcement for it to be able
to carry the load in transverse bending. This situation is further complicated by the
fact that, often, construction loads may be significant and not allowed for at the design
stage (so the required transverse reinforcement is not present). The need to mobilise
a significant area of slab also has implications when more than one concentrated
load is applied. SCI has produced guidance (AD 450[41] and AD 477[42]) that shows how
to design the transverse reinforcement, and indeed how to reduce the width of the
longitudinal strip in order to find the best compromise for transverse requirements.
It may also be used to justify the transverse reinforcement that is present when an

                                                                                                                                           49
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          `unexpected' construction load, such as that from a MEWP, is applied. This process is
                                          implemented in an SCI Tedds module. The use of load-span tables, based on uniform
                                          loading, is clearly also unjustified when significant concentrated loads are present. See
                                          Section 6.3.2 for further information on concentrated line or point loads.

                                          The vertical shear resistance of a reinforced composite slab using bar or fabric
                                          reinforcement has traditionally been assessed as for a reinforced concrete slab,
                                          using guidance given in BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 or BS 5950-4. However, Generation
                                          2 EN 1994-1-1 will include a revised model that recognises a contribution from
                                          the decking, that supplements the concrete resistance. Whilst the Eurocode is still
                                          under development, several teams of researchers have published work that supports
                                          the general conclusion that the decking also contributes. SCI currently advocates
                                          the use of a `first principles' model that is closely based on what has been used in
                                          France for almost a decade. This combines the resistance of the concrete part, in
                                          accordance with BS EN 1994-1-1, with the shear buckling resistance of the decking
                                          webs determined in accordance with BS EN 1993-1-3. As advocated by SCI, the model
                                          includes a proposed reduction in the contribution of the decking to recognise that
                                          some coincident moment may be present (this reduction brings the method in-line
                                          with what is expected to be the final method presented in EN 1994). It is assumed
                                          that the end anchorage needed to generate this level of shear buckling resistance is
                                          present. The method is fully described in SCI's Eurocode Nugget Vertical resistance
                                          of composite slabs[43]. `Punching' shear resistance, against localised loads, should
                                          also be assessed using these Standards. When fibre reinforcement is used, designers
                                          should seek guidance from the manufacturers.

                                             Manufacturers' load-span tables for slabs are normally based on testing. Designers
                                             should take care to ensure that they do not use this information for situations that
                                             are not covered by the scope of the testing especially if concentrated line or point
                                             loads are applied to the slab. Designers should always read the notes associated
                                             with the load-span tables presented by the manufacturer as these may differ.

                                  4.2.4 Design for serviceability

                                      Crack control

                                          There is a risk of cracking in the concrete in all composite slabs due to the restraint to
                                          drying shrinkage provided by the steel decking and primary steelwork, even though the
                                          decking effectively acts as reinforcement and helps to distribute the shrinkage strains
                                          so that large cracks do not form. However, cracks do not normally pose a durability or
                                          serviceability hazard for situations where composite slabs are commonly used. Only
                                          where the surface of the slab is used as a wearing surface, or where terrazzo or other
                                          `rigid' floor coverings are to be used, may specific reinforcement (in addition to the
                                          `standard' fabric) be required in order to control the cracking. When cracking is an
                                          issue, reinforcement percentages in excess of 0.3% will normally be required in order

                 50
to limit crack widths to the recommended values. Fabric, rather than bars, is generally
used to control cracking.

According to BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, when continuous slabs are designed as simply
supported in the normal condition, the minimum cross-sectional area of the anti-crack
reinforcement within the depth of the concrete cover to the decking should be as
follows:

 0.2% of the cross-sectional area of the concrete above the ribs for unpropped
     construction

 0.4% of the cross-sectional area of the concrete above the ribs for propped
     construction.

It is possible that larger crack widths will occur over the intermediate supports
with propped construction, because the full self-weight of the slab is applied to
the composite slab on removal of the props, which explains the higher minimum
percentage reinforcement required.

The above amounts do not automatically ensure that the crack widths are less than
the typical value of 0.3 mm given in BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 (and the UK National
Annex to this code) for certain exposure classes. If the exposure class (or the floor
finish) is such that cracking needs to be controlled, the slab should be designed as
continuous, and the crack widths in hogging moment regions evaluated according to
BS EN 1992-1-1:2004.

Experience shows that the greatest risk of cracking is over supporting beams, owing to
the combination of restrained drying shrinkage and flexural action[44]. `Induced' joints
may be used to reduce the risk of random cracking at these locations. Such joints can
be formed by sawing the slab, but clearly, care is needed to prevent the reinforcement
required for fire resistance and longitudinal shear resistance of the supporting beam
from being damaged or severed. However, this method is not recommended and where
cracking has to be controlled, a more reliable measure is to use additional crack
control reinforcement at the support[45].

When fibre reinforcement is to be used in place of bar/fabric reinforcement the
suppliers of the fibres should be consulted regarding crack control measures.

Deflections

Deflections due to loading applied to the composite slab should be calculated
using elastic analysis, neglecting the effects of shrinkage. For an internal span of
a continuous slab, where the shear connection is achieved by either mechanical or
frictional interlock, or end anchorage by thru-deck welded studs, the deflection may
be determined using the average value of the cracked and uncracked second moment
of area. This applies both for design to the Eurocodes and design to BS 5950, but the
modular ratio for long-term and short-term effects is calculated slightly differently in BS
EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-4 (which refers to BS 5950-3).

                                                                                                                                           51
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                             BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 permits calculations of the deflection of the composite slab
                             to be omitted if both the following conditions are satisfied for external or simply
                             supported spans:

                              the span/depth ratio of the slab does not exceed certain limits specified in
                                  BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 for lightly stressed concrete (shown here in Table 4.6); and

                              the load causing an end slip of 0.5 mm in the (long span) tests on composite slabs
                                  exceeds 1.2 times the design service load.

                 Table 4.6   Single spans    Normal concrete  Lightweight concrete
  General rules for the      End spans                 20                 18.8
  slab maximum span-         Internal spans            26                 24.5
                                                       30                 28.3
       to-depth ratios in
       accordance with
BS EN 1992-1-1:2004

                             For cases where the end slip exceeds 0.5 mm at a load below 1.2 times the design
                             service load, two options exist for the designer:

                              end anchors should be provided; or
                              deflections should be calculated including the effect of end slip.

                             Should the behaviour of the shear connection between the sheet and the concrete not
                             be known from tests on composite slabs with end anchorage, BS EN 1994-1-1:2004
                             permits a tied-arch model to be used. The model gives the deflection that should be
                             considered; however, the method can be over-conservative. Guidance for designers on
                             this case can be found in the Designer's guide to BS EN 1994-1-1[46].

                             For design to BS 5950-4, there are also simple design rules to ensure adequate
                             deflection behaviour of a composite slab. Calculation of deflections is not necessary
                             when designing to this code if the span-to-depth ratios are not greater than those given
                             in Table 4.7. Confirming that the slab satisfies these limits will ensure that excessive
                             deflections are avoided. The effective span of the decking is defined in BS 5950-4 as
                             the smaller of:

                              the distance between the centres of the supports, and
                              the clear span between the supports plus the effective depth of the

                                  composite slab.

                                             Normal concrete  Lightweight concrete

              Table 4.7      Single spans    30                                                   25
        General rules
                             End spans       35                                                   30
           for the slab
     maximum span-           Internal spans  38                                                   33
    to-depth ratios in
    accordance with          Note: Values apply to supported spans with (where relevant) nominal continuity reinforcement, subject to
                             uniformly distributed loading
           BS 5950-4

                             The values in Table 4.7 apply to slabs under uniformly distributed loading, with nominal
                             continuity reinforcement (0.1%) over the intermediate supports for end and internal
                             spans, i.e., they are designed as simply supported at both ends. For slabs with full

52
                     continuity reinforcement over the supports, reference should be made to BS 8110.
                     Deflections should be calculated explicitly for slabs that fail to satisfy the span-to-
                     depth ratio or reinforcement limits. BS 5950-4 recommends that the deflection of the
                     composite slab should not normally exceed the limits in Table 4.8.

                     Criterion                            Recommended Limit

        Table 4.8    Deflections due to the imposed load  Ls/350 or 20mm, whichever is the lesser
 Recommended
                     Deflection due to the total load less the deflection
    limits for the   due to the self-weight of the slab plus, when props Ls/250
        maximum      are used, the deflection due to prop removal

    deflection of    Notes:
composite slabs      Ls is the effective span of composite slab, which is the smaller of:
                     a) distance between centres of permanent supports, and
           given in  b) clear span between permanent supports plus effective depth of composite slab ds
      BS 5950-4

                     The stiffness of slabs reinforced with conventional fabric reinforcement can be
                     determined using `normal' reinforced concrete design rules (assuming fully effective
                     bond between the decking and the concrete). When fibre reinforced concrete is used,
                     advice on the slab stiffness should be sought from the manufacturer.

                     Dynamic sensitivity

                     The dynamic sensitivity of composite slabs is not normally critical, because they are
                     relatively stiff compared with the beams, although the dynamics of the whole floor
                     should be considered, as explained in Section 5.2.2.

                     Cracking of internal concrete surfaces will generally not compromise the structural
                     performance of a building, so for economic design its consequences may often
                     be ignored.

                     4.2.5 Design for fire resistance

                     Deemed to satisfy ways of demonstrating the fire performance of floor slabs required
                     by Building Regulations are defined by Approved Document B to the Regulations (and
                     equivalent documents for other parts of the UK). The Approved Document requires the
                     slab performance to be assessed based on criteria for insulation `I', integrity `E' and
                     load bearing capacity `R'. For design to the Eurocodes, BS EN 1994-1-2:2005[47] and
                     the UK National Annex to BS EN 1994-1-2:2005[48] provide guidance on how composite
                     slabs may be designed to meet these criteria. For UK design, guidance is available in
                     BS 5950-8[11].

                     The insulation criterion is satisfied by providing adequate slab thickness to ensure
                     that the average temperature rise over the whole of the non-exposed surface is limited
                     to 140°C and the maximum temperature rise at any point of that surface does not
                     exceed 180°C. BS 5950-8 and PN005: Fire resistance design of composite slabs[49]
                     (for Eurocode design) provide a table of recommended concrete thicknesses to satisfy
                     the insulation criterion for common periods of fire resistance. The minimum thickness

                                                                                                            53
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                             of concrete required to satisfy the insulation requirements is shown in Table 4.9 for
                             trapezoidal decks and Table 4.10 for re-entrant decks. Figure 4.11 shows that the
                             insulation depth depends on the type of profile, and it is the concrete cover to the main
                             crest of the deck for trapezoidal profiles and the full slab depth for re-entrant profiles.

             Table 4.9       Concrete type                         Minimum thickness of concrete (mm)
Minimum thickness                                                  for a fire resistance period (mins) of:

          of concrete,                                         30                       60              90   120
   measured above
  the steel deck, for        Normal concrete (all cases)       60                       60              70   80
trapezoidal profiled
steel deck exposed           Lightweight concrete (all cases)  50                       60              70   80
to the standard fire
                             Thickness is measured above the profile (See Figure 4.11)

           Table 4.10        Concrete type                         Minimum thickness of concrete (mm)
Minimum thickness                                                  for a fire resistance period (mins) of:

        of slab for re-                                        30                       60              90   120
     entrant profiled
                             Normal concrete (all cases)       100                      100             110  125
         steel sheets
      exposed to the         Lightweight concrete (all cases)  100                      100             105  115

        standard fire        Thickness is measured above the profiled decking soffit (See Figure 4.11)

              Figure 4.11
                 Minimum

        insulation depth
           measurement

                             BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 permits the designer to calculate the bending resistance and
                             insulation properties assuming that composite slabs fulfil the integrity criterion.

                             Fire tests have been carried out on slabs with conventional fabric reinforcement, and
                             on fibre reinforced slabs.

                             The load bearing resistance of the slab at elevated temperatures can be determined by
                             calculation in accordance with the principles given in BS EN 1994-1-2:2005. The UK
                             National Annex provides additional guidance on determining design temperatures for
                             UK decking geometries.

                             Depending on the span required, an increased size of fabric may need to be used, or
                             extra bars may need to be placed in the troughs of the deck, to satisfy the load bearing
                             criteria (R) for the fire condition. In either case, the additional reinforcement is used to
                             compensate for the loss of strength of the (exposed) decking at elevated temperatures.
                             Design guidance covering this aspect is normally given by the decking manufacturers
                             in their design tables and software. These tools are based on the extended application
                             of fire test results and provide product specific guidance which will result in the most
                             economic solutions for fire design. The extended applications of the fire test results are
                             based on a design model for plastic resistance that is in accordance with the principles
                             of BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 Section 4.3.1 and the recommendations of the UK National
                             Annex to BS EN 1994-1-2:2005.

54
In the UK National Annex, the use of Informative Annex D of BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 is
rejected as many UK decking profiles are outside the limits of the field of application.
It was found that when the methods in Annex D were applied to these decking
geometries, unsensible answers were obtained. SCI has produced NCCI in the form
of document PN005: Fire resistance design of composite slabs[49] . This provides
guidance on temperature profiles, and how to determine slab resistance for the
resulting temperatures.

Slab designs that comply with the recommendations of BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 for room
temperature design are deemed to have 30 minutes fire resistance, when assessed
under the load bearing criteria `R', but these slabs still need to be checked for
compliance with the insulation criteria.

Further information on the calculation of load bearing resistance of composite slabs
can be obtained from Fire resistance design of steel framed buildings (P375)[50] .

4.2.6 Openings and edges

Openings

Openings can be accommodated readily in composite slabs. Some advice as to limits
on the size of openings, and the provision of any extra reinforcement that may be
required, is normally provided by the decking manufacturer. Further advice is given
here on issues relating to design for openings in slabs with shallow decking. Advice
relating to the construction of openings is given in the BCSA Code of Practice for Metal
Decking and Stud Welding.

Openings may be categorised by their size:

 Small - openings up to 300 mm wide. These are unlikely to present a problem
     structurally and do not normally require additional reinforcement. When additional
     reinforcement is present in the trough of the deck this must be taken into account
     when considering the implications of an opening (see below for further details)

 Medium - openings between 300 mm and 700 mm wide. These normally require
     additional reinforcement to be placed in the slab. This is also the case if the
     openings are placed close together

 Large ­ openings greater than 700 mm wide. These should be trimmed with
     additional permanent steelwork back to the support beams.

The dimensional limits need only apply to the width of the opening (perpendicular to
the direction of span of the slab). This is because they are based on the ability of the
slab, without additional measures for small openings and with additional measures for
anything larger, to transfer self-weight and loads transversally between ribs[51].

It should be noted that slightly different dimensions from those given above may
be quoted in a manufacturer's literature for specific profiles, in which case the
manufacturer's guidance should be followed.

                                                                                                                                           55
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          For small and medium size openings, normal practice is for the Principal Contractor to
                                          form an opening by `boxing-out' an area of decking using timber or polystyrene inserts
                                          before concreting, as shown in Figure 4.12. The decking should not be cut until the
                                          concrete has gained 75% of its design strength. Then it may be cut or burnt away to
                                          form the opening, and the cut edges bent up or ground off. There are also proprietary
                                          products available which are cut to the shape of the decking profile that can be used
                                          for boxing-out and for construction joints.
                                          If cutting the deck prior to casting is unavoidable, temporary propping is likely to
                                          be required. This may have implications on the slab design, and the PSD should
                                          be consulted.

                             Figure 4.12
                      Typical examples

                           of boxing out
                                openings
                                                    courtesy of SMD
                                          For large openings, the supporting trimming steel should be in position prior to placing
                                          the decking. The opening should then be trimmed prior to casting the slab, as shown in
                                          Figure 4.13.

                             Figure 4.13
                     A typical trimmed

                           opening with
                             a GRP floor

                         grating system
                            immediately

                     after deck laying,
                      prior to fixing the

                         reinforcement
                             around the
                                 opening
                                                    courtesy of VoidSafe®, SMD
                                          Cutting the slab after concreting (post-forming the openings) may cause a loss of bond
                                          between the concrete and the decking and is not recommended. When post-forming
                                          is unavoidable, non-percussive cutting methods such as diamond core drills or saws
                                          should be adopted, so that the disturbance to the mechanical interlock between the
                                          decking and the concrete is kept to a minimum. The structural implications of the

                 56
location and size of the opening need careful consideration and should always be
referred to the PSD.

The need for extra reinforcement in the slab, or additional trimming steelwork, depends
on the size of the opening. Requirements should be determined by the PSD, who
may delegate this responsibility to a slab or steelwork specialist. The PSD will identify
reinforcement requirements on the contract drawings and should be consulted if there
are any doubts about the location of openings or the amount of reinforcement needed.
Any additional reinforcement that may be required should be designed in accordance
with BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 or BS 8110.

Site operatives should be made aware that additional reinforcement is required around
medium sized openings. This often takes the form of bars placed in the troughs of
the decking adjacent to the opening, with additional transverse bars used to `smooth
out' the load transfer around the opening (see Figure 4.15). The distance between an
opening and an unsupported edge should not be less than the greater of either 500 mm
and the width of the opening. If the opening falls within the usual `effective breadth' of
concrete flange of any composite beams (typically span/8 each side of the beam centre
line), the beam resistance should be checked assuming an appropriately reduced
effective breadth of slab.

In the absence of any specific manufacturer's guidance on the provision of extra
reinforcement, it may be assumed that an effective system of beam strips span the
perimeter of the opening, as shown in Figure 4.14. The effective breadth of the beam
strips should be taken as do/2, where do is the width of the opening in the direction
transverse to the decking ribs.

The transverse beam strips are assumed to be simply supported and span a distance of
1.5do. The longitudinal beam strips are designed to resist the load from the transverse
beam strips, in addition to their own proportion of the loading. Extra reinforcement is
provided within the beam strips to suit the applied loading. For the transverse strips
only the concrete above the ribs is assumed to be effective. For the longitudinal strips
this reinforcement often takes the form of bars placed in the troughs of the decking
(see Figure 4.15). Additional transverse or diagonal bars may be used to improve load
transfer around the opening. Reinforcement bars in these beam strips will need to
extend at least an anchorage length beyond the centre line of the supporting beam.

Although a small opening (up to 300 mm wide) is unlikely to present a problem
structurally and openings of this size do not normally require additional reinforcement,
for the unusual (in the UK) case of a slab with extra bars in the troughs, their positioning
relative to the opening needs to be considered. A 300 mm wide opening could very
easily `interrupt' a bar in a trough. Such interruption would need to be compensated for
by placing additional longitudinal bars in the adjacent troughs using an adaptation of
the beam-strip model normally used for medium-sized openings.

For medium-sized openings it is also worth remembering that some of the reinforcement
in the beam-strips will be relatively susceptible to fire. Bars in troughs may have

                                                                                                                                           57
                                                                                  WWW.STEEL-SCI.COM

SCI Tedds Modules
P300 - Composite Slab Openings Designer

SCI has launched the second in a range of specialist SCI           "P300 - Composite Slabs and Beams using Steel Decking:
Tedds modules. This, and other modules in the range,               Good Practice for Design and Construction", supplemented
complement and extend the capability of the widely                 by SCI AD 447.
recognised Tekla Tedds software.
                                                                   The module addresses the topic of service openings
SCI is uniquely placed to produce such tools with over             in composite slabs, providing a method to design the
30 years of experience in providing information and global         reinforcement required in `reinforced concrete beam strips'
expertise to the construction sector.                              around both individual and multiple service openings.

This new Module: SCI P300 -- Composite Slab Openings               This makes the calculations easier and quicker to perform
Designer is available now and implements the guidance              and has credibility with checking Authorities and warranty
and design procedures described in this SCI publication,           providers due to its SCI provenance.

The SCI is committed to helping the steel construction industry                   +44 (0)1344 636501
meet design, manufacture, installation and commercial objectives.
                                                                                  teddsmodules@steel-sci.com
                    58

                                                                   Click or Scan
                                                                   for more info
                        sufficient concrete cover to keep them cool, but bars (and fabric) in the slab between
                        the ribs will become hot and loose considerable strength. Fire protection may be
                        needed to ensure that the beam-strips retain their integrity in a fire.

         Figure 4.14
   Load paths and

        beam strips
around medium to

    large openings
                        In some situations, with multiple small or medium-sized openings it will not be possible
                        to accommodate beam-strips (of the dimensions noted above) between adjacent
                        openings. It may be necessary to treat a group of openings as one (larger) effective
                        opening, and the reinforcement should be designed accordingly. SCI P300 ­ Composite
                        Slab Opening Designer Tedds Module extends the guidance presented herein and in
                        AD 447 to design the reinforcement around individual and multiple service openings.
                        Based on the size and layout of the openings, the SCI Tedds module will determine
                        the category of the service openings as well as the design scenario that needs to
                        be considered. If it is not possible to accommodate beam strips between adjacent
                        openings to carry the additional loads around the opening, the module considers the
                        multiple openings acting as one large effective opening and beam strips are designed
                        around the actual openings and the larger effective opening, picking up any local areas
                        of otherwise unsupported slab. When the size or layout of the openings is such that
                        trimming steel is needed below the slab, the module outputs the forces needed to
                        design this steelwork.

         Figure 4.15
               Typical

     reinforcement
  detailing around

         an opening

                                                                                                                                                                         59
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                      Slab edges
                                          The edges of the floor are usually formed using `edge trims' made from pressed strips
                                          of light gauge galvanized steel. Edge trim is delivered to site to the required depth and
                                          normally in standard 3.0 m long strips. The thickness of the steel used may vary with
                                          location, but is normally no more than 2 mm. The strips are cut to length on site to suit
                                          column centres. The trim is usually set out from the edge beam centre line (rather than
                                          the grid lines, which cannot be set out easily on site), as shown in Figure 4.16. The trim
                                          should be fixed in the same way as the decking. It should not be used as a tamping rail
                                          because it may be damaged.

                             Figure 4.16
                          Setting out of

                                edge trim
                                                     courtesy of SMD
                                          Restraint straps are always specified to tie back the upper part of the trim at 0.6 m
                                          to 1 m spacing, depending on the slab depth and overhang. Typical details are given
                                          in Figure 4.17, covering two distinct cases. Where the decking (with transverse ribs)
                                          runs over the edge beam and cantilevers out a short distance, the edge trim can be
                                          fastened in the manner suggested in Figure 4.17(a). The cantilever projection should
                                          be no more than 600 mm, depending on the depth of the slab and deck type used.
                                          This will also depend on where the hand rial is positioned.
                                          The more difficult case is where the decking ribs run parallel to the edge beam, and
                                          the finished slab is required to project a short distance, so making the longitudinal
                                          edge of the sheet unsupported Figure 4.17(b). When the slab projection is more than
                                          approximately 200 mm (depending on the specific details), the edge trim should span
                                          between stub beams attached to the edge beam, as shown in Figure 4.17(c). These
                                          stub beams are usually less than 3 m apart and should be designed and specified by
                                          the PSD as part of the steelwork package. If stub beams are not provided in this case,
                                          then additional support to the edge of the decking, such as by propping from the floor
                                          beneath, may be required and this information must be highlighted in the information
                                          passed to the contractor. Non-standard edge trims (for example those used to support
                                          cladding, or those forming a curved edge) will require more accurate setting out
                                          procedures than standard trim.
                                          Trims fixed to a curved edge are normally formed by cutting and bending the standard
                                          lengths to form a continuous faceted `curve' with, typically, 300 mm straight sides.

                 60
                 Further information on how edge trims should be attached and supported is given in
                 Reference 3.
                 Achievable tolerances for the position of the top of standard edge trims relative to the
                 steelwork (after concreting) are ±10 mm horizontally, and ±5 mm vertically. Tighter
                 tolerances than these may need to be specified for edge trims that incorporate sockets
                 for cladding supports. It will also be necessary to ensure that these trims do not deflect
                 excessively during concreting. The PSD must specify requirements for any such `non-
                 standard' trims.

 Figure 4.17
Typical edge

       details

             4.2.7 Temporary supports

                 Decking is usually designed to be unpropped for spans up to 3.5 m for profiles up to
                 60 mm deep, and up to 4.5 m for profiles 80 mm deep. For longer spans temporary
                 propping may be required, but this will depend on the depth of the concrete, the
                 profile used and whether the decking is multiple or single spanning. The limitations
                 of a particular decking should be checked with the manufacturer at an early stage so
                 that any propping requirement can be planned. The PSD should check whether beam
                 deflections during construction and the method of levelling of the slab would lead
                 to significant additional concrete loads (from concrete ponding) that have not been
                 allowed for in the design of the structure and decking (see Section 4.1.3). Propping
                 may be necessary to minimise ponding.
                 In general, traditional `shallow' decking does not require a propping system to be
                 in place, braced and levelled, before placing the decking. However, there may be
                 instances where this is required due to the product type and length of span. Deep
                 decking will generally require such propping for spans greater than 7.5 m. Propping
                 will reduce the deflections from the self-weight of the decking, which would otherwise
                 be difficult to remove if props were installed after laying the decking. It will also
                 minimise the risk of overloading the decking under loads during construction, e.g., from
                 operatives and storage. Despite these benefits the implications of using a design
                 which requires propping should be considered at an early stage, because it can have
                 sequence and programming implications, and can preclude the use of safety netting.

                                                                                                                                                                61
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          When temporary propping is positioned after the decking is placed, it is particularly
                                          important to check that the props are set in accordance with the PSD's requirements,
                                          and that any increased weight due to concrete ponding is allowed for in the design of
                                          the propping system.
                                          There may be small areas in a building where propping is necessary, even when the
                                          main areas of the floor remain unpropped. These propped areas may include bays that
                                          are in-filled after the removal of climbing cranes or lift shafts and have non-standard
                                          span lengths. The decking layout drawings should show the extent and lines of
                                          temporary supports.
                                          Normally, props are placed at either mid-span (one line of props) or at third points (two
                                          lines of props) within a span. Isolated props should not be used, and all props should
                                          be suitably braced (in the direction of the line of the props and perpendicular to this) to
                                          prevent dislodgement during construction operations.
                                          Props normally consist of lengths of timber and/or steel plates supported by adjustable
                                          length steel tubes (`Acrows'). The minimum bearing length of the timber and/or plates
                                          depends upon the thickness of the slab, the span length and the decking rib geometry.
                                          Bearing lengths are typically in the 75 to 100 mm range. The timber bearer should
                                          be continuous and should extend the full width of the bay. The decking sheets should
                                          never be interrupted (cut) at the location of a temporary support, and the decking
                                          should not be fastened to the temporary supports. It is good practice to carry out a
                                          final check of the propping system before pouring the concrete.
                                          A typical temporary support is shown in Figure 4.18. Props of this nature are normally
                                          placed about 1 m apart, according to the PSD's requirements.

                             Figure 4.18
                   Temporary support

                           using `Acrow'
                                     props
                                                     courtesy of SMD
                                          Props may be supported off the floor directly beneath the floor being concreted, but the
                                          designer should check that the design capacity of the lower floor is not exceeded (the
                                          supporting floor should have achieved its design strength before props are installed).
                                          If the lower floor does not have sufficient resistance, further `back' propping will be
                                          needed (i.e., using props to support the floor that is supporting the props).

                 62
                        Props should never be placed directly on the decking alone as this could result in
                        localised buckling of the deck. Further guidance on back propping can be found in
                        Reference 52.

                        Props should not be removed until the floor has reached 75% of its design strength.
                        This is normally achieved in 7 to 8 days, but the PSD should be consulted specifically
                        before removal, unless general guidance has already been given. Where crack
                        control is essential, props should not be removed until the floor has achieved its
                        specified strength.

                        Other temporary support details may be needed for special situations, such as end
                        supports in refurbishment projects or where there are concrete encased beams.
                        Particular care should be taken with non-standard details to ensure that the
                        sequencing of the construction is practicable. A typical detail for the temporary support
                        of the decking at an encased beam is shown in Figure 4.19. In this case, the decking
                        is supported initially off the steel beam, and a temporary prop is inserted under the
                        decking close to the beam. This must be of sufficient width to avoid crushing of the
                        decking during concreting (see Section 4.1.4). The decking is then cut back to allow
                        access for the reinforcement and the shuttering to be positioned, and the concrete to
                        be poured. This detail is only suitable for re-entrant decking because the decking can
                        interlock into the concrete by the `dovetails', without needing support underneath in
                        the permanent condition. The decking cannot contribute to the shear resistance of
                        the finished slab. Use of this detail should be confirmed by the PSD and indicated on
                        the drawings.

         Figure 4.19
Special temporary

      support detail
      for re-entrant
decking abutting a
 concrete encased

                beam
                              courtesy of SMD

                   4.2.8 Attachments

                      Hangers

                        The best way to eliminate the hazardous activity of post-drilling concrete to attach
                        services is to use hangers, and designers are encouraged to specify them. Many
                        decking profiles have re-entrant slots into which proprietary wedges can be inserted to

                                                                                                                                                                         63
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          receive threaded rods. The rods serve as hangers to the services, and they have a safe
                                          load-carrying capacity of, typically, 100 kg to 200 kg each. Some examples of these
                                          attachments are shown in Figure 4.20 for trapezoidal and re-entrant decking profiles.

                             Figure 4.20
                            Examples of
                    wedge attachment
                     fixings for ceilings
                           and services

                                                     courtesy of SMD

                                          Designers wishing to make use of such attachments should seek information, including
                                          safe load capacities, from the decking and/or hanger supplier. For services that are too
                                          heavy for the capability of the hangers, it may be necessary to use drilled expanding
                                          anchor fixings into the composite slab (taking care to ensure that the resistance of the
                                          fixing is appropriate for this type of use).
                                          For detailed information on the interface between the services and the floor, refer to
                                          Interfaces: Design of Steel framed buildings for service integration[53].
                                      Cladding supports
                                          Brackets cast into the edge of the slab may be used to support the cladding. The
                                          brackets may form part of a proprietary edge trim. The trim may then need to be
                                          set out more accurately on site than a standard edge trim, but prior to this the
                                          support system should be co-ordinated early during the design process to allow for
                                          horizontal deviations in the edge of slab position of at least ±25 mm (more for high
                                          rise buildings). Such an allowance is necessary because not only may the allowable
                                          tolerances for the cladding be considerably more stringent than those for the frame,
                                          but also because the brackets may move during concreting. An example of decking and
                                          edge trim with an integral channel section that can be used with a brickwork support
                                          system is shown in Figure 4.21. The maximum overhang and propping details are
                                          shown in Figure 4.22, where the 125 mm minimum dimension is recommended so that
                                          all typical sizes of edge trim, anchors and local reinforcement can be accommodated. It
                                          is important that the edge trim can be effectively anchored into the concrete.
                                          For buildings exceeding three storeys in height, it is important that the material/coating
                                          used for the brickwork supports is limited to austenitic stainless steel or aluminium
                                          bronze, phosphor bronze or copper in a non-aggressive environment, and limited to
                                          austenitic stainless steel in an aggressive environment[54].

                 64
                       As an alternative to cast-in brackets, drilled fixings may be used to achieve greater
                       accuracy, although these require the use of power tools and may be more time-
                       consuming. For further information on cladding attachments see Interfaces: Curtain
                       wall connections to steel frames[55] .

        Figure 4.21
      Typical metal
    deck edge trim
    and integrated
brickwork support

              system
                             courtesy of Ancon

        Figure 4.22
          Maximum
           overhang

  dimensions and
  propping details

                             courtesy of Ancon

                          Cladding fixing brackets should be provided with provision for adjustment, in
                          recognition of different tolerance requirements for the slab edge and the cladding.
                          This may avoid problems and additional cost on site.

               4.3 Acoustic insulation

                       Building designers should consider two basic `types' of sound transmission, airborne
                       and impact. The acoustic insulation (attenuation) of both types of sound, and
                       particularly airborne sound, is partly related to the mass of the element through which
                       the sound is passing. It is also affected by the presence of any `soft' layers, which
                       increase the sound absorption.
                       High levels of sound insulation are typically required in:
                        Multi-occupancy residential buildings
                        Hotels
                        Schools and other education-related buildings
                        Hospitals and other health-related buildings.

                                                                                                                                                                        65
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          For composite floors with shallow decking, the bare composite slab will normally
                                          provide a similar degree of acoustic insulation to a reinforced concrete slab with a
                                          thickness equal to the average thickness of the composite slab. However, the floor
                                          should not be considered as an element in isolation because the acoustic performance
                                          of the walls, and the junction details between the walls and floors, also need
                                          consideration. The junctions need to be detailed to minimise sound which may travel
                                          around the floor; known as flanking sound. Further guidance on this is provided in SCI
                                          Publication P372[56] . Approved Document E to The Building Regulations[57] requires
                                          residential buildings to undergo pre-completion acoustic testing to demonstrate
                                          compliance unless the walls, floors and their interfaces have been constructed in
                                          accordance with `Robust Details'[58].
                                          Enhancing the acoustic performance of the floor by adding mass is not very efficient
                                          and is not always practical. This is particularly true for impact sound. A much more
                                          effective means of enhancing sound attenuation is by the use of layers above
                                          and below the floor slab. A `resilient layer' of material applied above the bare slab
                                          and beneath the walking surface is an effective way of reducing the impact sound
                                          transmission through the floor. The walking surface material, such as a screed
                                          or chipboard, forms a `floating layer' above the resilient layer; the sound energy
                                          is absorbed by the resilient layer rather than being transmitted through the floor.
                                          A ceiling layer suspended below the floor slab will reduce airborne and impact
                                          sound transmission. In addition, the impact sound transmission can be reduced by
                                          suspending the ceiling on resilient bars, which reduces the sound transfer from the
                                          slab. Numerous proprietary acoustic floor and ceiling systems are available which
                                          incorporate these features.
                                          As a guide to the acoustic performance of typical composite floor constructions, the
                                          attenuation that can be expected is given in Table 4.11 (these are indicative values
                                          based on test results). All the values given in the table are for normal weight concrete,
                                          which is recommended for dwellings and buildings where acoustic insulation is
                                          important. Lightweight concrete will generally give slightly less sound insulation than
                                          normal weight concrete.
                                          Details of a composite floor with shallow decking, that complies with Robust Details, is
                                          shown in Figure 4.23.

                 66
                     Form of Floor Construction                            Sound pressure level (dB)

                     Approved Document E requirement for purpose built     Airborne Sound    Impact Sound
                     dwellings                                                Attenuation          Level

                                                                           DnT,w + Ctr (dB)     L'nT,w (dB)

                                                                                   45               62

                     Shallow Deck Floors

                     An 18 mm chipboard walking surface over 25 mm of

                     dense mineral wool over a 175 mm slab on a 60 mm      55                43
                     trapezoidal deck. A 12.5 mm plasterboard ceiling

                     suspended from the slab on a metal framed grid.

                     An 18 mm MDF walking surface over a 10 mm dense

                     fibre resilient layer over a 200 mm slab on a re-     56                34
                     entrant deck. A 30 mm (2 x 15) plasterboard ceiling

                     suspended from the slab on a metal framed grid.

                     A 70 mm screed on 5 mm foam resilient layer over a

                     150 mm slab on 50 mm re-entrant deck. A 12.5 mm

                     plasterboard ceiling suspended from the slab on a     56                40

                     metal framed grid with 85 mm of mineral wool in the

                     ceiling void.

                     A 18 mm chipboard walking surface supported on

        Table 4.11   softwood timber battens on a 25 mm acoustic quilt
         Indicative
acoustic data for    over a 150 mm slab on a re-entrant deck. A 25 mm (2   60                34
composite floors
                     x 12.5) plasterboard ceiling suspended from the slab

                     on a metal framed grid.

     Figure 4.23
Typical shallow
composite slab
with a battened

   resilient floor
           system

             4.4 Further reading

                    The references given below mainly relate to slab design. Detailed information on
                    authors and publishers is given in Section 8, References.

                    Concrete Society Technical Report No. 63, 2007 - Guidance for the design of steel-
                    fibre-reinforced concrete[40].
                    This publication summarises the range of applications for steel-fibre-reinforced
                    concrete and includes practical aspects such as production and quality control.

                                                                                                                                                                     67
DESIGN OF DECKING AND SLABS

                                          Concrete Society Technical Report No. 65, 2007 - Guidance on the use of macro-
                                          synthetic fibre reinforced concrete[37].
                                          This publication reviews the current range of applications for Macro-synthetic Fibre
                                          Reinforced Concrete and gives guidance on quality control.

                                          Interfaces: Curtain wall systems for steel frames (P101)[55]
                                          This outlines the main considerations in the design of a curtain wall attachment
                                          system, and reviews some of the systems available for steel framed buildings.

                                          Composite design of steel framed buildings (P359)[59]
                                          This design guide provides a comprehensive design methodology for composite slabs
                                          on I section steel beams, for design in accordance with the Eurocodes. The guidance is
                                          complemented by a full numerical worked example.

                                          Acoustic detailing for steel construction (P372)[56]
                                          This guide explains the principles of acoustics in a very readable way. Sound insulation
                                          values are given for many examples of floor and wall construction, and typical details
                                          are recommended which are compatible with the Robust Details Handbook[58].

                                      Advisory Desk

                                          The following `Advisory Desk' items, published in New Steel Construction and available
                                          on SteelBiz, provide further information relevant to this Section:

                                          AD 150, Vol 1, December 1993[60], Composite floors - wheel loads for fork lift trucks.
                                          This note gives a procedure for checking the behaviour of slabs under heavy point
                                          loading. [Further advice is given in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, clause 9.4.3.]

                                          AD 163, Vol 2, December 1994[24], Provision for water vapour release in composite
                                          slabs. This note explains the problems sometimes associated with water vapour
                                          release in composite roof slabs. It is suggested that perforated roof felt may be used,
                                          but the use of perforated decking is not recommended.

                                          AD 247, Vol 9, March 2001[8], Use of composite construction in an aggressive
                                          environment. This note gives advice on improving the corrosion resistance of
                                          decking and beams for an aggressive environment. It recommends using coated
                                          steel or additional paint protection for decking and discusses the advantages and
                                          disadvantages of using shot-fired studs or pre-welded studs for beams.

                                          AD 447, Vol 28, July/August 2020, Openings in Composite slabs. This note provides
                                          guidance on the provision of openings in composite slabs with clarification on the
                                          critical dimension of a small opening and dealing with situations with multiple
                                          openings.

                                          AD 450, Vol 28, October 2020[61], Resistance of composite slabs to concentrated
                                          loads. This note considers EN 1994-1-1:2004 clause 9.4.3 of which has been the
                                          cause of much confusion; and in particular part 5, the limits of 7.5 kN and 5.0 kN/m2.

                 68
AD 461, Vol 29, May 2021, Anchorage of bars in the troughs of composite slabs. This
note provides guidance on the anchorage length of bars that are placed in troughs to
provide moment resistances in a fire situation.
AD 477, Vol 30, February 2022[42], Transverse bending of composite slabs subjected to
point loads. This note provides guidance on the design of composite slabs subjected to
concentrated point loads. It proposes a more sophisticated approach, as a supplement
rather than a replacement for the approach in AD 450.
AD 485, April 2022, Continuity of additional bar reinforcement for fire in composite
floors. The purpose of this AD note is to clarify the function of the reinforcement and
address the issue of continuity in the design of composite floors.

                                                                                                                                           69
ADVERTISE YOUR
PRODUCTS HERE
Contact SCI for details

          70
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE
BEAMS

This Section provides information covering design principles and procedures, codified
design rules, and guidance on good practice in design and detailing. It (along with
Section 4) is aimed primarily at the PSD, and any SSD. Summary boxes are used to
highlight particular issues of good practice, or things that the designer should be
aware of.
Composite beams typically consist of downstand steel `I' sections acting structurally
with a concrete slab by means of shear connectors attached to the top flange of the
steel section, as shown in Figure 5.1. The scope of this Section does not cover beams
that are integrated within the slab depth, in so-called shallow floor construction. An
effective width of slab is taken as acting as part of the composite section on either
side of the centreline. Fabric reinforcement is normally placed in the slab; its main
role, possibly supplemented by individual bars, is to act as transverse reinforcement in
order to transfer the forces between the shear connectors and the slab. Alternatively,
fibre reinforcement may be used to fulfil this role. Fabric or fibre reinforcement may
also serve as a means of controlling crack widths. The beams are generally designed to
be simply supported.
Traditionally, advice was that it was necessary to position fabric reinforcement below
the head of the stud shear connectors to ensure that the design shear resistance
and ductility of the connectors could be realized. However, on the basis of recent test
evidence, it is now considered satisfactory (and better from a buildability point of view)
to place the fabric above the studs and use it for both longitudinal shear resistance,
and for integrity in the fire design situation. A proviso is that when assessing the shear
connection, an appropriate reduction factor as given in PN001[62] and outlined in
P405[63] is applied to the value of stud resistance given by BS EN 1994-1-1:2004. The
situation regarding design to BS 5950-3 is simpler as there is no restriction on the
position of the fabric[64] (the rules for stud resistance are based on tests with the most
onerous positioning, and so can be used to cover all cases).

                                                                                                                                           71
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                             Figure 5.1
                         Typical cross
                   section through a
                    composite beam

                                        The composite action developed between the steel beam and concrete slab
                                        significantly increases the load carrying capacity and stiffness of the beam, by factors
                                        of up to two and 3.5 respectively[65]. These benefits can result in significant savings in
                                        steel weight and/or structural floor depth.
                                        It is often found that the size of the steel section is governed by serviceability
                                        considerations because composite beams tend to be used for long span applications
                                        (in excess of 9 m). This makes deflection and dynamic criteria more likely to be critical.
                                        Controlling deflections is particularly important where brittle ceiling finishes are
                                        specified, or for edge beams, where excessive deflections can damage the cladding.
                                        Designers should note that where edge beams are designed as composite beams,
                                        care is required to ensure that the decking, edge trim, shear connector, slab edge
                                        and reinforcement details are practicable. Edge beams are sometimes designed
                                        non-compositely to avoid transverse reinforcement requirements, which may result in
                                        problems of reinforcement congestion.

                          5.1 Construction stage

                                        The steel sections are normally designed to be unpropped during construction so must
                                        be sized to support the self-weight of the slab, and other construction loads, in their
                                        non-composite state. Design is generally in accordance with BS EN 1993-1-1:2005[66],
                                        although BS 5950-1 may also be used.
                                        The weight of extra concrete from ponding of the slab should be allowed for in the
                                        design of the beams when the deflection of the decking under the wet weight of
                                        the concrete exceeds one tenth of the depth of the slab, in accordance with both
                                        BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-4. Careful consideration should be given to the
                                        correct allowance for the weight of the concrete when `mass flood' levelling techniques
                                        are adopted ­ see Section 6.2.1. As well as checking the resistance of the steel
                                        beams, this will involve an assessment of their stiffness. Beams that are not suitably

               72
stiff will deflect excessively during concrete placement which may impact on the ability
to achieve the required surface tolerance, and the extra concrete should be allowed for
in the design.

When designing to the Eurocodes, the construction load is defined in
BS EN 1991-1-6:2005 and is taken as the same construction load as for designing
the decking, as described in Section 4.1.2. However, in the U.K. it is recommended
to ignore the 0.75 kN/m2 patch load and simply design for a uniform load of
0.75 kN/m2. This is recommended on the proviso that there is good site control, and
(as can be seen below) still represents a 50% increase in the equivalent load used
when designing to BS 5950. The self-weight of the wet concrete is treated as a variable
load. See AD 346 for further information on design actions during concreting and the
recommended expressions for combinations.

When designing to BS 5950, the construction load should be taken as an `imposed
load' of not less than 0.5 kN/m2 applied uniformly over the supported area. The
construction loading should be applied in addition to the self-weight of the concrete,
reinforcement and decking. This non-composite check may dictate the final choice of
section size if subsequent imposed loads are low.

To use a steel beam economically, the top (compression) flange needs to be restrained
laterally. The restraint provided by the decking to the beams depends on the decking
orientation and the fixings. The restraint provided by decking spanning in a direction
parallel to a beam is normally assumed to be negligible, but decking spanning
perpendicularly to a beam can provide restraint if it is adequately connected. In
this latter case, continuous lateral restraint occurs when thru-deck welded shear
connectors are provided (irrespective of other fixings), but when there are no shear
connectors, restraint is limited by the resistance of the fixings. This will depend not only
on the shear resistance of an individual fixing (refer to manufacturer's specification for
shear resistance values), but also on their spacing along the beam. The PSD should
ensure that the restraint assumed in the design is provided by the fixing arrangement;
guidance on the force that must be resisted is given in the SCI publication Lateral
stability of steel beams and columns[67] and BS EN 1993-1-1:2005 (or BS 5950-1).

  Check that the steel beam size chosen is capable of supporting the wet weight of
  the concrete, and other construction loads, in its non-composite state.

  Check that beam deflections during construction will not lead to significant
  additional concrete loads (due to ponding) that have not been allowed for in the
  design.

  The decking will only provide lateral restraint to the beams during construction
  if the resistance of the fixings is adequate, and where the decking ribs run
  perpendicular to the beams.

                                                                                                                                           73
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                          5.2 Composite stage

                                5.2.1 Design for resistance

                                        Composite beams, in buildings, are generally designed in accordance with BS EN
                                        1994-1-1:2004 (or BS 5950-3). In both cases, the bending resistance of the section
                                        is normally evaluated using `plastic' principles (provided the cross section will not be
                                        subject to local buckling). The calculated resistance is then independent of the method
                                        of loading, i.e., whether the beam is propped or unpropped during construction. The
                                        resistance must be adequate for the maximum total design moment at the ultimate
                                        limit state.
                                        The plastic moment resistance is calculated using idealised rectangular stress
                                        blocks, as shown in Figure 5.2. In BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 it is generally assumed that
                                        stresses of fyd and 0.85 fcd can be achieved in the steel and concrete respectively,
                                        where fyd (=fy/M0) is the design yield strength of the steel and 0.85fcd is the bending
                                        compression resistance of the concrete. It is 0.85 times the design cylinder strength
                                        of the concrete fcd, where fcd= fck/c. Equivalent strengths in BS 5950 are py for the
                                        design yield strength of the steel and 0.45fcu for the design bending compression
                                        strength of the concrete (where fcu is the cube strength of the concrete). In some cases,
                                        when higher strength steel is used, BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 introduces a beta factor
                                        that reduces the plastic moment resistance. Using this adjustment a simple plastic
                                        approach can still be used even though the concrete may have insufficient strain
                                        capacity to avoid crushing before the steel section fully yields.
                                        The plastic neutral axis may fall within the depth of either the slab or steel section,
                                        depending on the relative areas of these two components.

                             Figure 5.2
                   Plastic analysis of
                  composite section

                         (using BS EN
                      1994-1-1:2004

                              notation)
                                        The area of concrete in compression is limited by its effective breadth. This
                                        breadth varies continuously along the length of a beam, as shown schematically in
                                        Figure 5.3. Its form depends on the type of loading, and the end conditions (simply
                                        supported or continuous). However, a simpler form may be assumed for design.

               74
                            In BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, the effective breadth is defined as constant for the middle
                            portion of the span and tapering towards each end, as shown in Figure 5.3. The
                            distance between centres of pairs of shear connectors, b0, is also included. For the
                            serviceability limit state, a constant effective breadth can be assumed to act over the
                            entire span, based on the mid-span value. In BS 5950-3, the effective breadth is a
                            constant value for a simply supported beam with decking perpendicular to the beam.
                            For both BS 5950-3 and BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 the maximum value of the effective
                            breadth is span/8 on each side of the centre-line of the beam for both serviceability
                            conditions and for the ultimate limit state. As well as considering this limit, the width
                            assumed in design must not exceed the actual slab width available. This is particularly
                            relevant for edge beams and beams adjacent to openings, where there may be only a
                            narrow width of slab on one side.

               Figure 5.3
 Effective width profile
 of a simply supported

    beam according to
BS EN 1994-1-1:2004

                            The compressive area of the concrete also depends on the orientation of the decking.
                            When the decking ribs run perpendicular to the beam, the concrete contained within
                            the depth of the decking must be neglected (see Figure 5.4(a)). When the decking
                            ribs run parallel to the beam, the total cross-sectional area of the concrete may be
                            considered, provided that it lies above the neutral axis of the composite section
                            (Figure 5.4(b)).

                            The stress blocks that can be generated in the steel and concrete, and used to
                            calculate the moment resistance, may be limited by the amount of longitudinal shear
                            force that can be transferred between the materials at their interface (which is a
                            function of the number of shear connectors and their resistance). If this limit governs,
                            it is called `partial interaction' (see Section 5.3.3). It is worth noting that a lower
                            bound exists for the amount of shear force that can be transferred, defined in terms
                            of a minimum degree of shear connection. This limit is not related to the amount of
                            force transfer that is needed to resist the applied loads, but rather a minimum level
                            of stiffness that is required at the interface to limit slip at the beam ends to a value
                            that can be accommodated by the shear connectors. Limiting values for degree of
                            shear connection are given in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 (and BS 5950-3), but a more
                            comprehensive consideration of the subject allows much lower values to be given in
                            SCI P405. The values in P405 pre-empt what is likely to appear, in a more simplified
                            way, in Generation 2 EN 1994-1-1.

                                                                                                                                                                               75
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                        It is normally assumed in both BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-3 that all of the
                                        vertical shear force applied to the beam is resisted by the steel section alone. Design
                                        checks should therefore be in accordance with BS EN 1993-1-1:2005 or BS 5950-3,
                                        which give guidance on the consideration of combined bending and shear. In addition,
                                        the width of the top flange of the steel section must be sufficient to ensure that the
                                        decking does not fail in bearing over the beam.

                             Figure 5.4
                   Composite beams

                         incorporating
                             composite

                       slabs. (a) Deck
                     perpendicular to
                   secondary beam.
                 (b) Deck parallel to

                        primary beam

                                           The concrete adjacent to the steel beam forms a structural flange, and the
                                           presence of openings in the slab will therefore influence the performance of
                                           the beam.

                                           Avoid placing slab openings next to beams (within the effective flange width)
                                           wherever possible. If such openings cannot be avoided, their effect must be
                                           included in the beam design.

                                5.2.2 Design for serviceability

                                     Deflections

                                        Composite beams are generally shallower (for a given span and loading) than
                                        non-composite beams, and they are used commonly in long span applications.
                                        Consequently, deflections are often critical. BS EN 1990:2002[68] (and BS 5950-1)
                                        recommends that deflections should not affect the appearance, the comfort of users or
                                        the functioning of the structure.

                                        In addition to the `traditional' deflection check under imposed loads, it is also prudent
                                        to check deflections due to the following:
                                         Total (in-service) loads ­ the combined dead and imposed loads should be

                                              considered to ensure that floor curvatures will not be unacceptable (see comments
                                              below on deflection limits). This is particularly important for long spans if there is
                                              limited depth available in the zone for under-floor services
                                         Construction loads ­ although not a serviceability deflection limit, it is necessary to
                                              check that excessive concrete ponding will not apply significant extra loading to the
                                              structure.

               76
                   For edge beams supporting cladding, it is important that the deflections are checked
                   under cladding and imposed floor loads to ensure that the deflection of the beams
                   does not compromise the performance of the cladding.

                   `Uncracked' elastic section properties should be used to calculate the deflection of
                   simply supported beams (the total area of concrete within the effective flange width is
                   considered, even that part which in reality will be cracked in tension). A transformed
                   section is used; the effective width of the slab is reduced using a modular ratio equal
                   to the elastic modulus of the steel divided by that of the concrete. The effect of creep
                   of the concrete is taken into account by choosing a modular ratio between one based
                   on short term concrete properties and one based on long term properties, according to
                   the mix of long and short-term loading.

                   When designing to BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, the increased flexibility of the composite
                   beam caused by greater slippage between the concrete slab and the steel section
                   when using partial shear connection may be ignored if the degree of shear connection
                   is not below 50%. However, BS 5950-3 requires an additional deflection to be
                   included using a modification factor. When SCI publication P405 is used (as NCCI to
                   complement Eurocode design) to justify lower minimum degrees of connection, its
                   guidance also requires that deflections are increased to allow for the greater interface
                   flexibility that this may result in. P405 uses the same approach as BS 5950-3.
                   Generation 2 EN 1994-1-1 will include lower limits for minimum degree of shear
                   connection than the current code (not dissimilar to the values in P405), and will make
                   a similar allowance for loss of beam stiffness.

                   For the calculation of deflections where props are used, all the loads are applied to the
                   composite section.

                   Deflection limits for beams subject to imposed load are recommended in the National
                   Annex to BS EN 1993-1-1:2005 (or BS 5950-1). As a more comprehensive guide, the
                   deflection limits given in Table 5.1 may be considered in design.

                   Beam Type                Load Case                Limit     Absolute Limit
                                                                               (mm)

                                            Imposed load             Span/360 To suit finishes

                   Internal beams           Total load               Span/200 To suit finishes

                                            Dead load at construction stage -  25

                   Edge beams supporting    Imposed load             Span/500  To suit cladding
                   both floor and cladding  Imposed load + cladding  Span/360  To suit cladding
                                            Total load               Span/250  To suit cladding

        Table 5.1  Edge beams supporting    Cladding weight          Span/500 To suit cladding
      Suggested    cladding only
deflection limits
  for composite    Notes:

           beams           Although not a serviceability criterion, this is to limit the additional load due to ponding of the

                           concrete, consequent on beam

                                                                                                                                77
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                        Where dead load deflections would be excessive, pre-cambering may be appropriate
                                        (this is normally only adopted for beams longer than 10 m). However, the pre-camber
                                        required may be difficult to determine accurately; for example, the stiffening effect of
                                        the end connections may be significant, so some pre-camber may remain after casting,
                                        and the depth of the slab may not be as intended at the critical point of mid-span.
                                        Therefore, a general rule of thumb is to design any pre-cambering to eliminate no
                                        more than two thirds of the dead load deflection. In some situations, large or varying
                                        amounts of pre-camber between different beams within a sheet length, may even
                                        hinder the laying of decking.

                                        Further information on methods of calculating deflections are given in Composite
                                        design of steel framed buildings (P359)[59]. For the assessment of beams with web
                                        openings, additional guidance may be found in Design of beams with large web
                                        openings for services[69].

                                           The deflection limits used in design should be chosen to suit the building details.

                                           Pre-cambering can be used to limit beam deflections under dead load. Assessing
                                           the amount of pre-camber needed may prove difficult, and calculations should take
                                           into account the likely stiffening effect of the end connections.

                                     Irreversible deformation

                                        In BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 there is no specific requirement to limit stresses at the
                                        serviceability limit state (see clause 7.2.2). In BS 5950-3, the stresses in simply
                                        supported composite beams at the serviceability limit state, calculated using
                                        elastic principles, are limited to py in the bottom fibres of the steel section, and
                                        0.5fcu in the concrete slab. Full shear connection, with negligible slip, may be
                                        assumed when calculating these stresses. Any part of the concrete in tension
                                        should be neglected when calculating stresses (`cracked' section properties should
                                        be assumed ­ unlike the procedure for calculating deflections, when uncracked
                                        properties may be assumed). A similar limitation could be applied when designing
                                        to BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, whereby the steel stress would be limited to fy and the
                                        concrete stress to 0.63fck.

                                        In unpropped construction, the stresses should be calculated first for the non-
                                        composite section subjected to the loading at the construction stage, and then those
                                        for the composite section should be added. In propped construction, the stresses due
                                        to the construction loading are often ignored.

                                     Dynamic sensitivity

                                        Traditionally, the parameter used to assess the dynamic sensitivity of a floor is its
                                        natural frequency. This allows a simple assessment of what is, in reality, very complex
                                        behaviour. A frequency of 4 Hz is a commonly accepted lower limit for the natural
                                        frequency of an individual composite floor beam, as this will generally mean that the

               78
frequency of the entire floor system is greater than 3 Hz, and therefore ensure that
excitation activities do not occur at a frequency that coincides with that of the floor.
A higher frequency limit may be appropriate for applications such as dance floors
and gymnasia.

The natural frequency of a floor beam may be determined from the approximate
formula f = 18/, where  is the static deflection (in millimetres) resulting from the
application of the self-weight of the floor, plus that of the ceiling and finishes, plus 10%
of the imposed loading applied to the composite beam. Partitions tend to increase the
damping and stiffness of the structure and are not included in the loading.

Floors are likely to be more `lively' in situations where there is a grid of primary beams
and secondary beams. In these cases, the cumulative deflection of the slab, secondary
beams and primary beams (i.e., the total deflection in the middle of the slab) should
be assessed, and a combined floor frequency calculated. A method for determining
the combined frequency is set out in Design of floors for vibration: A new approach[71].
This publication also includes methods for determining the likely accelerations of a
floor when subjected to vibration, in terms of Response Factors, and it is recommended
that this more detailed analysis is used to assess the dynamic sensitivity of a floor if
response is likely to be critical.

Long span applications, for which composite beams are often used on account of their
excellent resistance and stiffness characteristics, often have a relatively low natural
frequency. However, they also tend to have a high effective mass. The consequence
of this is that the inertia of the floor relative to the impacting dynamic loads is
large, so that floor accelerations (which are what dictate occupant comfort) remain
acceptably low. This means that even if the natural frequency limit is not satisfied, a
full calculation of the floor response may show it to be satisfactory. Further information
may be found in Reference 70.

5.2.3 Design for fire resistance

Typically, composite beams are designed to achieve the required fire resistance by
applying fire protection materials. Three methods of protection are commonly used:
boards, sprays and intumescent coatings. Fire protection adds to the cost of the
structural frame and has implications on the construction programme, as another
trade has to be accommodated in the fabrication or construction programme. There
are alternative methods of design available which limit the extent of fire protection
required on composite floor plates, as described in SCI publication, P288[71].

It is also possible to take the fire protection operations for beams off-site. Using off-
site intumescent coatings, unlike traditional forms of protection (which are applied on
site), means the operation is not on the critical path and is not affected by the weather.
Although more careful handling and storage of the sections is required with offsite
coatings, any slight damage can be touched up easily. Thru-deck stud welding on site
may have an effect on the intumescent coating but does not prohibit the use of off-

                                                                                                                                           79
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                           site protection of composite beams. Part of the upper surface of the top flange must
                           remain unprotected, and the minimum flange thickness required by BS EN 1994 may
                           not be sufficient to prevent blistering of the intumescent on the underside (note that
                           some blistering may be acceptable). Further information is available in Code of Practice
                           for Off-site Applied Thin Film Intumescent Coatings[72].

                           For composite beams that are to be fire protected, a `critical temperature' needs
                           to be established in order to enable the required thickness of fire protection to be
                           determined. It is worth noting that it may be cost effective to increase the size of the
                           steel profile in order to reduce the thickness of protection that is needed (although this
                           may have a negative impact on embodied energy). Methods of determining the failure
                           temperatures are provided in BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 and BS 5950-8. The terminology
                           used to describe these methods is different in each Standard but they both provide a
                           calculation model for determining the relationship between beam failure temperature
                           and the load applied in fire conditions. The thermal properties of proprietary fire
                           protection systems are not readily available in the public domain. Table 5.2 provides
                           an initial estimate for the critical temperature for composite beams subject to bending.
                           More comprehensive information is given in BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 and in BS 5950-8.
                           The load level at the fire limit state fi should be calculated as follows:

                           "#  =  "#,',(
                                   '

                           where Efi,d,t is the design value of the effects of actions at the fire limit state and Rd is
                           the design resistance at normal temperature.

                           For beams designed to the Eurocodes, it is recommended that the resistance of the
                           composite beam is verified by calculation of the moment resistance Mfi,Rd using the
                           procedure given in section 4.3.4.2 of BS EN 1994-1-2:2005, which is described in
                           more detail in Fire resistance design of steel framed buildings (P375). The temperature
                           of the steel for this calculation should be based on the value of critical temperature
                           obtained from Table 5.2, where values have been calculated on the basis of a uniform
                           temperature for the steel section. There is no limitation on the depth of the section that
                           may be designed using the temperatures from Table 5.2, and the temperatures are
                           appropriate for all values of shear connection. For beams designed to BS 5950-8, the
                           use of the limiting temperature method is recommended.

                           Beams with web openings present a particular problem as far as the specification of
                           fire protection is concerned, as the critical mode of failure may be related to buckling
                           of the web posts between the openings rather than global bending at the point of
                           maximum applied moment. The performance of the fire protection material has also
                           been found to influence the critical temperature. The critical temperatures given in
                           Table 5.2 should not be applied to beams with web openings. Further guidance on fire
                           protection of cellular beams is given in RT1356[73].

80
                        Description of                Critical Temperature (ºC) for a load level fi of:
                        member
           Table 5.2                             0.7  0.6  0.5          0.4   0.3  0.2                    0.1
              Critical  Composite members
                        in bending supporting    535  567  600          641   680  738                    838
      temperatures      concrete slabs or
      for composite     composite slabs
downstand beams

                        When the ribs of the profiled steel decking run across the steel beams, voids are
                        created between the decking and the top flange of the steel (see Figure 5.4). Although
                        additional heat enters into the steel beam via these voids, BS EN 1994-1-2:2005
                        recommends that the voids are ignored if at least 85% of the surface of the top flange
                        is in contact with the slab. This means that for re-entrant decks the voids do not need
                        to be filled. However, for trapezoidal decks the voids must be filled - or the effect of
                        the voids on the beam temperature must be considered when determining the critical
                        temperature of the section. This is beyond the scope of the simple thermal model given
                        in BS EN 1994-1-2:2005. Therefore, if the voids are to be unfilled, the temperature
                        of the beam must be determined from tests or advanced analysis. Using decking with
                        preformed (`crushed') ends may alleviate this problem.

                        Fire tests in accordance with BS 476-21[74] have shown the effects of unfilled voids
                        on structural performance[75]. As UK Building Regulations still recognise the BS 476
                        test methods, this guidance may still be used in the UK - although this situation may
                        change in the future. Guidance is given in Table 5.3 to identify when special measures
                        must be taken because of these voids, and what they should be. In some cases, it may
                        be necessary to increase the thickness of fire protection to compensate for the adverse
                        effect of the voids, or they may be filled.

                                                      Trapezoidal deck

                        Beam Type  Fire Protection                     Fire Resistance (minutes)
                                   on Beam
                                                      Up to 60            90                      Over 90

                        Composite  Insulating sprays  No increase in      Increase thickness      Fill voids
                                   and boards         thickness           by 10 % or assess       Fill voids
                                   (assessed at                           thickness using
                                   550° C)            Increase thickness  A/V increased by
                                                      by 20% or assess    15%*
                                   Intumescent        thickness using
                                   coatings           A/V increased by    Increase thickness
                                   (assessed at       30%*                by 30% or assess
                                   620° C)                                thickness using
                                                                          A/V increased by
                                                                          50%

            Table 5.3   Non-composite All types       Fill voids
Recommendations
                                                      Re-entrant deck
  for fire protection
  of voids between      Beam Type  Fire Protection                     Fire Resistance (minutes)
                                   on Beam
       profiled steel                                 Up to 60            90                      Over 90
        decking and
     steel beams in     Any        All Types          Voids may be left unfilled for all periods of fire
    composite floor                                   resistance
        construction
                        * The least onerous option may be used (A/V=heated surface area per unit volume of the steel section)

                                                                                                                               81
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                        It should nevertheless be remembered that, for all beams forming part of a fire
                                        compartment wall, the voids should always be filled to avoid affecting the integrity of the
                                        compartment wall.

                                        Where the voids have to be filled, it is not necessary to use the same material as that
                                        used to protect the beam; any non-combustible material will suffice.

                                        For beams with decking orientated parallel to them, the edges of the top flange must be
                                        protected; when board protection is used, the boards should be taken past the edge of
                                        the flange to abut the underside of the decking.

                                          It is not always necessary to fire protect the voids between the steel flange and
                                          decking. Specifying such protection unnecessarily will lead to increased costs.

                         5.3 Shear connection

                                        The longitudinal shear connection between the steel section and the concrete is
                                        provided by shear connectors, which normally take the form of studs welded to the top
                                        of the steel section. All connectors should be capable of resisting uplift forces caused
                                        by the tendency for the slab to separate from the beam as it bends. In the case of shear
                                        studs this is achieved by the head of the stud.

                                        Although shear connectors fix the decking to the beam and can ensure composite action
                                        between the slab and the beam, they may not be needed simply to achieve this. They
                                        may also be used to tie the slab to edge beams when the floor acts as a diaphragm, and
                                        to address robustness requirements.

                                5.3.1 Connectors

                                        The most common type of shear connector used in composite beams for buildings has
                                        a 19 mm diameter with a nominal length after welding through decking of either 95 mm
                                        or 120 mm (the same studs would be 5 mm longer if welded directly to a beam flange).
                                        For thru-deck welding (see below), this is the only stud diameter that can be used
                                        practically, because it is the only one for which suitable ferrules are readily available.
                                        Although other heights are available, they are not so easy to obtain.

                                        There are a number of other forms of shear connector available, such as angles
                                        welded to the top flange. Rules have also been developed in recent years for so-called
                                        composite dowels, although to-date they have only found application in bridges (at
                                        the time of writing a CEN Technical Specification to supplement BS EN 1994-1-1 is
                                        being developed and will cover their use in buildings). However, most other forms of
                                        shear connection lack a practical application in composite beams, with the exception
                                        of shot-fired connectors. These should be considered for smaller projects, those where
                                        beams need to be galvanized or top flanges painted for reasons of durability, or indeed
                                        any project where the provision of power for stud welding is a problem. They may
                                        be particularly appropriate for refurbishment projects, where there is either limited

               82
access, increased risk of fire or no earthing facility. The most common shot-fired shear
connector is that produced by Hilti, which is available in heights up to 140 mm. It should
be noted that a shot-fired connector typically has less resistance than a welded stud.
Design guidance and design values of the shear resistance should be obtained from
the supplier.

  It should be noted that although a shot-fired connector has less resistance than a
  welded stud, they may be more suitable for certain applications. Design guidance
  should be obtained from the supplier.

Resistance

Design resistances of shear studs are given in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-3,
based on standardised push-out tests on samples with `standard' fabric reinforcement.
However, tests have also been carried out on specimens with fibre reinforcement, and
these results show they perform at least as well as those with fabric reinforcement. The
design resistance is a function of the:

 Shape of the decking profile
 Decking orientation
 Size, strength and number of connectors per decking trough
 Concrete properties
 The sheet thickness (according to BS EN 1994-1-1:2004).

In BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, the resistance of a stud in a solid slab is calculated directly
from formulae which include terms for the steel strength and concrete strength and
modulus. The concrete modulus can be found in BS EN 1992-1-1:2004, where the value
for normal concrete (Ecm) is given in Table 3.1, and the value for lightweight aggregate
concrete (Elcm) is given in Table 11.3.1. The presence of shallow cracking above a beam
does not necessitate a reduction in the design resistance of the shear connectors,
because of the presence of the transverse reinforcement or steel fabric reinforcement.
When decking is present the solid slab resistance is reduced as a function of the
geometry of the shear connection and decking profile, and the decking orientation.
Although not clear in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004, it is recommended that the stud resistance
values should be calculated using the nominal length after welding value[76].

In BS 5950-3, the design resistance of a stud in a solid slab in normal weight concrete
is given in Table 5, according to concrete strength and stud dimensions. These values
are reduced by 10% when lightweight concrete is used.

The reason why the efficiency of the shear connectors may be reduced when the
decking is orientated with the ribs transverse to the beam is because the force
transferred through the shear connector into the slab relies on a small, localised
area of concrete immediately in front of the stud as can be seen in Figure 5.5. For
this orientation of the decking, this area of concrete is limited in size by the presence
of the profile, as shown in Figure 5.6. Limiting the volume of concrete ahead of the

                                                                                                                                           83
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                        stud changes the concrete failure mode ­ in a solid slab the concrete is most highly
                                        stressed around the base of the stud, whereas with transverse decking a concrete
                                        surface passing over the stud is associated with failure. Reduction formulae are given
                                        in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-3 to allow for this by considering the relative
                                        geometry of the stud and the decking rib.

                             Figure 5.5
                      Local failure of

                          the concrete
                          surrounding
                          a shear stud
                        in trapezoidal

                                decking
                                                   courtesy of University of Luxembourg

                                        As well as the shape and thickness of the decking, the position of the stud in the
                                        trough is important; tests have shown that the integrity of this local area of concrete
                                        can break down if the stud is positioned close to the decking. The formulae given
                                        in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-3 assume that studs are located centrally
                                        in the troughs or are alternated between the `favourable' and `unfavourable' side
                                        of the trough. Recommended practice is to place the studs in the `favourable' side
                                        (see Figure 5.6). This means that, for single studs on simply supported beams with
                                        symmetric loading, the position of the stud in a trough with a central stiffener must
                                        change at mid-span.
                                        The number of studs placed transversely (across the width of the beam) in each
                                        trough also affects their resistance. A reduction factor should be applied to the design
                                        resistance when two studs are present. Note that the design resistances given in BS
                                        EN 1994-1-1:2004 explicitly do not cover more than two studs per trough.
                                        It is anticipated that the Generation 2 EN 1994-1-1 will introduce revised values for
                                        stud resistances, alongside revised requirements for the length of embedment of the
                                        stud in the solid concrete above the deck. However, it will also include the possibility to
                                        demonstrate performance by specific testing, so it is not expected to have an impact on
                                        current UK practice. It may also include consideration of different grades of connector
                                        ductility, as defined by a load-slip curve.
                                        For further information on resistance, reference should be made to the Designer's
                                        guide to BS EN 1994-1-1, Composite Design of Steel Framed Buildings (P359) and the
                                        Commentary on BS 5950: Part 3: Section 3.1 Composite beams.

               84
        Figure 5.6
Shear connector

          forces in
composite slabs

                    Attachment of studs

                      `Thru-deck' welding is generally used, particularly in the UK, to attach the shear studs
                      to the steel beams. This process welds the stud, decking and steel section effectively
                      together in a single operation. A typical run of thru-deck welded shear studs is shown
                      in Figure 5.8. The PSD should recognise the following practical limitations before
                      specifying thru-deck welding:

                       The galvanized steel decking should not exceed 1.25 mm thick, and the total
                           galvanizing thickness should normally not exceed 0.05 mm

                       The thickness of the top flange of the steel section must not be less than 0.4 times
                           the stud diameter (i.e., 7.6 mm for a 19 mm stud) to prevent localised bending of
                           the flange at ultimate loading

                       Small numbers of studs are uneconomic because of the amount and expense of
                           the equipment needed

                       A clear height above a beam of at least 600 mm is recommended to carry out
                           the process of stud welding, i.e., to give room for the operative and equipment.
                           (A typical example of where a problem can occur is when there is a change in the

                                                                                                                                                                      85
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                              floor level, as shown in Figure 5.7.) In these situations, it may also prove difficult to
                                              fix the slab edge trim. For shot-fired fixings, the clear height could be reduced
                                         The need to keep the top of the beam flange free of paint is generally not a
                                              problem (in an internal environment having an exposed, unprotected top of flange
                                              in the `voids' is acceptable). Thru-deck welding may however blister any paint
                                              applied, and required, on the underside of the flange. Remedial measures may
                                              be required for aesthetic, if not corrosion protection, reasons. An intumescent
                                              coating on the underside of the flange might also be damaged but would not
                                              normally need remedial work other than for aesthetic reasons. Whilst it is not
                                              typically necessary to return paint to the top flange, where this is a specific project
                                              requirement the paint should extend no more than 10 mm from the edge of the
                                              flange. Paint thickness should be considered and intumescent coatings are not
                                              suitable for this region
                                         A minimum flange width is needed to provide sufficient bearing for the decking
                                              on both sides, end distance from the stud to the sheet when anchorage from the
                                              stud is required (for decking design and to enable the decking to be included
                                              as transverse reinforcement and shear reinforcement), and transverse distance
                                              between studs. Consequently, when the decking is perpendicular to the beam,
                                              flange widths less than 125 mm are not recommended (see below for advice when
                                              pre-welded studs are used).

                             Figure 5.7
                     Minimum height
                  clearance for stud
                   welding and fixing

                              edge trim

                                        Thru-deck welding of shear studs is not recommended for galvanised decking with
                                        more than 350 g/m2 of zinc coating because of the risk of substandard weld quality
                                        (typically metal decking has a total of 275 g/m2). For galvanized steel beams, the
                                        same Thru-deck welding process cannot be performed because the quantity of zinc will
                                        be considerably greater than the quantity present on steel decking, further information
                                        can be found in AD 365.
                                        Thru-deck welding is significantly more economical than the alternative of pre-welding
                                        the studs to the steel beams in the factory, although as noted above it is not always
                                        an option.

               86
                       Problems associated with using pre-welded studs include:
                        Deck installation can be more complicated and therefore slower
                        Decking will normally need to be laid in single spans between the lines of studs,

                            which requires beams with a sufficient flange width (140 mm, although this could
                            be reduced to 133 mm provided deviations are tightly controlled on site) to provide
                            the minimum safe bearing for the decking on each side of the beam, and the
                            decking is less efficient as a single-spanning member
                        Alignment of the troughs in decking perpendicular to the beam with pre-welded
                            studs can be difficult. The flange width should be specified so that, should they
                            not align, at least 50 mm concrete encasement is provided beyond the transverse
                            spacing of the studs to the edges of the decking. The stud resistance may be
                            reduced when studs do not align with the troughs, and it should be calculated
                            using the reduction factor for ribs parallel to the beam using the width of
                            encasement provided, rather than the reduction factor for ribs perpendicular
                            to beam.
                       Holes may be cut in the decking to avoid these problems, but this leads to other
                       complications trying to align the studs and holes. Decking placement will become
                       more complicated because of the need to slot the studs through the holes, and so this
                       method is not recommended.

         Figure 5.8
      A run of stud
shear connectors

                            courtesy of Kingspan

                    Detailing rules
                       The following detailing rules apply to the positioning of stud shear connectors, and are
                       illustrated in Figure 5.10:
                        BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 requires that nominal height (before welding) of the shear

                            studs should be at least 2d (where d is the stud diameter) above the top of the
                            decking. The corresponding requirement in BS 5950-3 is 35 mm. (Note that the
                            `top of the decking' refers to the height of the shoulder, i.e., excluding any small

                                                                                                                                                                       87
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                              stiffening ribs in the crest of the decking.) Studs that are longer than is necessary
                                              to meet these requirements will not have a greater resistance according to these
                                              codified rules, although work undertaken in the development of Generation 2
                                              EN 1994 suggests greater embedment can result in higher resistance. A stud that
                                              is for example 105 mm long when manufactured would typically have length after
                                              welding of 100 mm when welded directly to a beam flange, or 95 mm when welded
                                              through decking. It would generally be described as a nominal 100 mm stud.
                                              A nominal 100 mm stud, of 19 mm diameter, may therefore be used with 60 mm
                                              decking. Further guidance on the shear stud length can be found in AD 380 and
                                              AD 424[77]
                                         To avoid damaging the decking, the studs should be located along pre-determined
                                              lines marked on it by the deck installers
                                         The distance between the edge of the shear connector and the edge of the steel
                                              flange should not be less than 20 mm
                                         The minimum longitudinal spacing of the studs should be 5d. BS EN 1994-1-
                                              1:2004 states that the maximum spacing should not exceed the lesser of 800
                                              mm and six times the slab depth which P405 recognises as being too lenient (it
                                              requires studs to be placed in every trough with transverse decking). The limit
                                              given in BS 5950-3 is 450 mm, and this latter value is recommended in the light of
                                              recent test evidence[78]. It should be noted that studs are often required at larger
                                              spacings than these on non-composite beams for other purposes, such as restraint
                                              of the beam
                                         The transverse stud spacing should not be less than 2.5d in solid slabs and 4d in
                                              other cases
                                         Studs should normally be placed uniformly along the length of the beam. Any
                                              additional studs noted on the drawing that cannot be placed in equal numbers
                                              in all the troughs should be positioned symmetrically about the mid-span of the
                                              beam, working from the supports inward (assuming uniformly distributed loading)
                                         When the decking has a central stiffener in the trough (which makes it impossible
                                              to attach the stud centrally), adequate onsite quality control should be in place
                                              such that the studs should be attached on the favourable side of the trough
                                              (Figure 5.10 (c)). For symmetrically loaded beams, this will involve a changeover
                                              of position of the stud at mid-span. (`Favourable' or beneficial is defined as the
                                              side of the trough closer to the nearer support so that the zone of concrete in
                                              compression in front of the stud is larger than that behind the stud as shown in
                                              Figure 5.10 (a))
                                         It is assumed in BS EN1994-1-1 that a `staggered' arrangement (see
                                              Figure 5.10 (b)), in which pairs of studs are welded on the `favourable' and
                                              `unfavourable' sides of the trough, would be equivalent to having two studs placed
                                              in the central position, so this arrangement may be adopted when it is not possible
                                              to place both in the `favourable' position. However, in situations where trapezoidal
                                              decking with ribs transverse to the span of the beam is used, recent tests have
                                              shown that two studs will offer little benefit over a single stud

               88
          Figure 5.9
  Shear connector

    detailing at an
 edge (for 19 mm
   diameter studs)

        Figure 5.10
        Detailing of
shear connectors
(19 mm diameter)
   welded through
     decking (note
  that a staggered
        position for
     pairs of studs
    should only be
     adopted when
 they cannot both
 be placed on the
  favourable side)

                                                                                                                                                                        89
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                         At discontinuities in the decking, the studs should anchor both sheets. The
                                              minimum distance from the centre of the stud to the edge of each sheet should
                                              be 30 mm. Because of this, beams with flange widths less than 125 mm are not
                                              recommended ­ see notes on attachment of studs, above. [Note that studs should
                                              never be welded through two layers of decking. At joints, it is recommended the
                                              decking should be butted, and when studs are in single lines, they should be
                                              welded alternately on one sheet then the other (see Figure 5.10 (d)), and when in
                                              pairs they can be welded one on each.]

                                         Studs attached to edge beams should be placed no closer than 6d (from the stud
                                              centre-line) to the slab edge, as shown in Figure 5.9. Where the slab edge is less
                                              than 300 mm from the line of the studs, `U' bars should be specified around the
                                              studs in accordance with BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 (or BS 5950-3) to prevent bursting
                                              of the concrete near the slab edge.

                                5.3.2 Longitudinal shear

                                        Composite beams may be designed plastically if the shear connectors are sufficiently
                                        ductile. This enables a plastic shear connection resistance to be assumed, whereby
                                        the maximum resistance in each connector is assumed to occur simultaneously down
                                        the length of the beam. BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 states that 19 mm diameter studs with
                                        a `length as welded' greater than 76 mm may be assumed to satisfy this requirement.
                                        The total longitudinal shear force that can be transferred across the steel-concrete
                                        interface is the sum of the resistances of the shear connectors positioned within the
                                        length between a support and the point of maximum bending moment. Where the
                                        loading is asymmetric, the lesser of the resistances totalled either side of the point of
                                        maximum bending should be used.

                                     Transverse reinforcement

                                        The longitudinal shear resistance of the concrete slab must be checked to ensure that
                                        the force from the shear connectors can be transferred into the slab without splitting
                                        the concrete. This requires the provision of transverse reinforcement (perpendicular to
                                        the beam centre-line), which may take the form of fibre reinforcement in the concrete.
                                        It is usually found that fabric or fibre reinforcement is sufficient for the design of
                                        secondary beams, where the decking ribs run perpendicular to the beam (as shown
                                        in Figure 5.11(a)). For beams where the ribs run parallel to the beam (Figure 5.11(b))
                                        additional bar reinforcement is likely to be required. Potential shear planes through the
                                        slab lie on either side of the shear connectors (Figure 5.11). However, plane b-b need
                                        not be checked for composite slabs with single rows of studs as this failure will not
                                        occur in practice. The shear resistance per unit length of shear plane along the beam
                                        is a function of the concrete strength and the amount of reinforcement provided.

                                        For edge beams, `U' bars should be positioned as low as possible but with sufficient
                                        bottom cover for the aggregate to flow (BS 5950-3 states that the bars should
                                        be placed at least 15 mm below the head of the stud, although there is no such
                                        requirement in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004).

               90
         Figure 5.11
    Potential failure
planes through the
slab in longitudinal
 shear (a) Decking
   perpendicular to
 beam (b) Decking
   parallel to beam

                        The decking may also act as part of the transverse reinforcement to contribute to the
                        longitudinal shear resistance. The full resistance of the decking can be used when it
                        is placed transverse to the beams and is continuous. In situations where the decking
                        is discontinuous, the anchorage force that can be developed by the shear connectors
                        limits this action, but the decking contribution may be included, provided that there is
                        sufficient end distance of the decking beyond the centre line of the studs. Guidance on
                        the anchorage resistance is given in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 (clause 9.7.4(3)) and in BS
                        5950-4 (clause 6.4.3), but minimum values are quoted as 1.65 times stud diameter in
                        the former and 1.7 times stud diameter in the latter.

                        The contribution of the decking should always be neglected where it is not properly
                        anchored at discontinuities, or where the decking ribs run parallel to the beam.
                        In theory, when the decking is parallel to the beam and properly anchored, some
                        contribution to the longitudinal shear resistance could be included. However, including
                        this contribution is not recommended because the decking resistance is affected by
                        the (unpredictable) presence of laps on site; this approach is consistent with BS EN
                        1994-1-1:2004. Studs fixed in a single line at a butt joint in the decking do not provide
                        sufficient anchorage for the decking to contribute to the transverse reinforcement.
                        Further guidance on transverse reinforcement can be found in AD 192[79], AD 266[80],
                        AD 437[81] and AD 439[82].

                           Transverse reinforcement is always needed to ensure adequate performance of
                           the shear connection. Fabric may be sufficient, but a check is always necessary,
                           particularly for primary beams. Fabric is preferred because it minimises the need
                           for steel fixers to work in a bent position. Fibre reinforcement may also be used if it
                           provides sufficient resistance.

                           The contribution of the decking to the transverse reinforcement can only be
                           included if it is properly anchored, and this depends on a number of factors -
                           continuity of the decking, decking rib orientation, and laps in the decking. The
                           contribution of the decking should always be neglected where the ribs run parallel
                           to the beam.

                                                                                                                                                                          91
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                     Bending resistance envelope
                                        The bending resistance of a composite beam depends on the shear transfer between
                                        the beam and the slab. Consequently, the resistance increases away from the
                                        supports; the resistance at a given point is a function of the resistance moment
                                        of the bare steel beam and the number of connectors between that point and the
                                        nearest support.
                                        For a beam subject to uniformly distributed load, the maximum design moment is at
                                        mid span. It is only necessary for the PSD to check the moment resistance at this point
                                        and determine the total number of connectors needed to transfer the load into the
                                        slab (see Section 5.2.1 and Figure 5.3). The connectors should be evenly distributed
                                        between the support and mid-span.
                                        For beams subject to point loads, it is necessary to check the resistance moment
                                        at intermediate points, not just the point of maximum design moment. For example,
                                        Figure 5.12 shows a beam with four-point loads, the applied bending moment diagram,
                                        and a resistance moment that is just sufficient at each of the four load positions. To
                                        achieve the required resistance at the intermediate point `A', the number of connectors
                                        between that point and the nearest support must enable sufficient force to be
                                        transferred to the slab to achieve the required resistance MA. With a heavy point load
                                        close to the support, it may not be possible to accommodate the required number of
                                        studs over that short length.

                           Figure 5.12
                    Shear connector

                       distribution for
                    beams subject to

                         point loading

                                5.3.3 Degree of shear connection

                                        The maximum longitudinal shear force that can be transferred from the steel to the
                                        concrete is the lesser of the compressive force to cause concrete crushing, and the
                                        force that would cause yielding of the steel section in tension. If sufficient shear
                                        connectors can be provided to transfer this force, the full plastic resistance moment
                                        of the composite section can be achieved. This is known as providing `full shear
                                        connection'.

               92
`Partial shear connection' refers to a situation in which fewer shear connectors are
provided. In this case, the stress block method used for calculating the resistance
moment (see Section 5.2.1) must be modified to take into account the reduced
longitudinal force that can be transferred. The use of partial connection often results in
improved economy, and may be unavoidable when the number of shear connectors is
limited by the spacing of the ribs in the decking.

Deformation of the shear connectors allows slip between the concrete and the steel
section. This slip is zero at the point of maximum bending moment (often at mid-span)
and increases towards the supports; the longer the beam span, the greater the slip at
the supports. For partial shear connection, because there are fewer shear connectors,
there will be more slip for a given load than with full shear connection. To avoid any
adverse effects arising from excessive slip, a minimum limit to the degree of shear
connection is specified in BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 and BS 5950-3, although the rules
differ between them slightly.

BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 takes explicit account of three variables that affect minimum
degree of shear connection ­ namely beam span, steel grade, and any asymmetry
of the steel section. However, a number of other variables can also be considered,
including the type and orientation of decking, whether or not the steel beam is
unpropped during construction, the presence of regular large web openings, and
the utilisation in bending of the composite beam. In many cases, consideration of
this broader range of variables results in significantly less onerous requirements for
the minimum degree, thereby enabling composite solutions that according to the
code would be inadmissible. Further guidance on the degree of shear connection
considering these variables can be found in P405 and AD 362[83]. It is expected that
Generation 2 EN 1994-1-1 will include rules that are similar to those given in P405.

5.4 Further reading

The references given below relate particularly to beam design. For detailed information
on authors and publishers, see Section 8, References.

Composite design of steel framed buildings (P359)[59]
This design guide provides a comprehensive design methodology for composite slabs
on I section steel beams, for design in accordance with the Eurocodes. The guidance is
complemented by a full numerical worked example.

Designer's guide to BS EN 1994-1-1[46]
This guide provides the detailed background to the clauses to Eurocode 4. It includes
many worked examples that show the application of the individual clauses. It is a
standard reference for designers of composite beams to EC4.

Design of beams with large web openings for services (P355)[69]
This guide provides a design method for both composite and non-composite beams
with web openings. A model for the complex force distribution around an opening is

                                                                                                                                           93
DESIGN OF COMPOSITE BEAMS

                                        explained, from which a simplified method for stiffened and un-stiffened openings is
                                        derived. Guidance on the positioning and size of openings is included.

                                        Design of floors for vibration: A new approach (P354)[70]
                                        This guide examines the theoretical aspects of vibrations in buildings caused by people
                                        walking. It shows how floors may be analysed for their dynamic sensitivity and suggests
                                        acceptance criteria for the floor response.

                                        Fire protection for structural steel in buildings (4th Edition)[84]
                                        This publication explains the basic aspects of fire protection and fire protection
                                        appraisal procedures. It gives application details for most of the products available,
                                        and protection thickness required for different beam and column exposure conditions.
                                        This is the standard design reference for fire protection of structural steel.

                                        Code of Practice for Offsite Applied Thin Film Intumescent Coatings[72]
                                        This guidance document describes the design and specification issues relating to off-
                                        site applied thin film intumescent coatings.

                                        P178: Design for construction (P178)[85]
                                        This guide highlights the effects of basic design decisions on the overall buildability
                                        and cost of a building. It is aimed at engineers primarily but has a relevance to all
                                        those having a design input.

                                     Advisory Desk

                                        The following `Advisory Desk' items, published by the SCI in New Steel Construction and
                                        available on SteelBiz, provide further information relevant to this Section:

                                        AD 174, Shear connection along composite edge beams[86]. This note outlines a
                                        method for checking the bending resistance of composite edge beams in existing
                                        buildings where the shear connectors have not been properly fixed, or the transverse
                                        reinforcement has been omitted.

                                        AD 175, Diaphragm action of steel decking during construction[4]. A method is given
                                        in this note for checking the adequacy of the decking to stabilise the structure by
                                        providing diaphragm action. Fixing requirements are given.

                                        AD 192, Transverse reinforcement in composite T-beams[79]. A detailed description of
                                        the principles of longitudinal shear, and the role of transverse reinforcement, is given
                                        in this note. The background to the relevant clauses in BS 5950-3 is explained.

                                        AD 266, Shear connection in composite beams[80]. This note discusses the basis for
                                        effective breadth rules, the minimum degree of shear connection rules and transverse
                                        reinforcement calculations.

                                        AD 362, October 2011, Headed shear studs ­ Resistance and minimum degree of
                                        shear connection in composite beams with decking. This AD highlights key changes
                                        to BS 5950-3.1:1990 in Amendment no 1, issued in January 2010, related to shear
                                        connectors. The Amendment reflects the findings of extensive experimental studies on

               94
the performance of "through-deck welded" headed shear studs in composite beams,
as a result of which guidance on the design resistance and ductility of headed shear
studs was revised.

AD 400, September 2016, The degree of shear connection in composite beams and
SCI P405. The stud resistances presented in both BS 5950-3 (as amended in 2010)
and BS EN 1994-1-1 are lower than those given in the previous British Standard. This
has resulted in many composite beam designs (that were previously satisfactory)
becoming impossible to verify because the maximum number of studs that can be
accommodated on a beam is often less than the number of studs needed to satisfy
rules for minimum degree of shear connection.

AD 418, May 2018, Web-post buckling in composite beams with rectangular and
elongated web openings. The design of composite beams with large web openings is
presented in SCI publication P355, which has been adopted in the development of
software for the design of both hot rolled and fabricated steel sections with openings
of various shapes and sizes. In P355, the method for addressing web buckling next to
or between rectangular or elongated openings identifies two cases; closely spaced and
widely spaced openings.

AD 419, June 2018, Composite beams with different positions of web openings. SCI
publication P355 is widely used to design beams with large web openings. It is adopted
in the development of software to design hot rolled and fabricated steel sections with
openings of various shapes and sizes. The purpose of this Advisory Desk note is to
address some common practical problems related to adjacent openings of different
heights and positions.

AD 437, February 2020, Curtailment of transverse bar reinforcement in composite
beams with steel decking designed using Eurocodes. The purpose of this Advisory Desk
Note is to provide guidance on the curtailment of transverse bar reinforcement in slabs
on composite beams with steel decking, designed to EN 1994-1 1. Such information
was previously presented in AD 325, for design to BS 5950-3, but the provisions in
EN 1994-1-1, and the clauses in EN 1992-1-1 to which it refers, give more explicit
coverage of this topic than the BS rules. The approach to transverse bar curtailment is
therefore different.

AD 439, April 2020, Transverse reinforcement in composite beams. This Advisory Desk
note has been produced to reflect the publication in 2015 of P405 Minimum degree
of shear connection rules for UK construction to Eurocode 4. As a result, AD 241:
Transverse reinforcement in composite beams is redundant.

AD 441, May 2020, Minimum degree of shear connection in composite beams. Looks
at the minimum degree of shear connection in composite beams, in particular why
there is a need for such a limit.

AD 481, April 2022, Composite beams with deep composite slabs. This note deals with
the design of composite beams with deep composite slabs and includes additional
provisions for cases where the depth of the composite slab is greater than 180mm.

                                                                                                                                           95
96
                  CONSTRUCTION
                  PRACTICE ­ CONCRETE

                  This Section provides information concerning good practice in relation to the site
                  activities associated with the procurement, placement and finishing of in-situ concrete.
                  It is aimed at all personnel involved in the site activities. Guidance on concrete mix
                  design is included, but guidance is not given on access requirements for concrete
                  mixers, checking of concrete delivery notes etc. These issues are considered to
                  be general site practice, and not appropriate for inclusion in a guide on composite
                  construction.

                  6.1 Concrete supply

                  Concrete supply is normally the responsibility of the Principal Contractor, who should
                  make sure that it is specified, supplied and assessed (normally) in accordance with BS
                  8500-1 to meet the strength grade specified by the PSD. Basic details for some typical
                  concrete mixes are given in Table 6.1.

                  Aggregate Type            Normal weight       Lightweight

                  Strength Class      C25/30 C28/35 C32/40 C35/45 C40/50 LC25/28 LC28/31 LC32/35

                  Max water cement ratio 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.50 0.45 0.65 0.60 0.55

                  Minumum cement            260 280 300 320 340 260 280 300
                  content (kg/m3)

                  Notes:

                  1.      BS 8500-1 does not give universal relationships between strength class and water cement ratio

                          and minimum cement content. The relationships depend upon the exposure class and cement

       Table 6.1          types used. The relationships shown in Table 6.1 are those given in BS 8500-1 for XC exposure
        Concrete
  specifications          conditions. Other strength class/water cement ratio/cement content relationships are listed in BS
(extracted from
       BS 8500)           8500-1 for other exposure conditions

                  2.      The minimum cement contents listed are for 20 mm aggregate. Generally minimum cement

                          contents would need to be increased by 20 kg/m3 for 14 mm aggregate and 40 kg/m3 for 10 mm

                          aggregate.

                  To ensure the quality control of the concrete mix, it should be obtained from a plant
                  providing concrete in accordance with an approved quality assurance scheme.

                  Aggregate types and size

                  Most composite slabs are constructed with a normal aggregate, but lightweight
                  aggregate is available.

                  When normal concrete is specified, the maximum size of the aggregate needs to be
                  limited to ensure that the concrete may be placed easily into the decking ribs and
                  between the reinforcing bars.

                                                                                                                         97
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­
                          CONCRETE

                                     The nominal dimension of the largest aggregate, which has an angular nature, should
                                     not exceed the smallest of the following limits (see Figure 6.1).

                                      40% of the concrete cover above the ribs
                                      The average width of the decking troughs (trapezoidal decking)
                                      One third of the minimum trough width (re-entrant decking).

                                     It is recommended that 20 mm aggregate is used whenever possible. When smaller
                                     aggregates are used, the required cement content will increase, and the shrinkage
                                     performance of the concrete will be adversely affected.

                                     With lightweight concrete, aggregate size is not a problem because of the small,
                                     rounded nature of the pellets.

                         Figure 6.1
                   Nominal cross-

                          sectional
                dimensions used

                      to determine
                         maximum
                           concrete

                   aggregate size

                                 Consistence

                                     To ensure that the concrete is sufficiently workable to allow it to be pumped with the
                                     correct flow, and to achieve adequate compaction around the reinforcement, in the
                                     troughs of the decking and around the steel beams in shallow floors, a minimum
                                     consistence class of S3 should be specified in line with BS 8500-1.

                                     Concrete mixes with low consistence should not be used as this can lead more readily
                                     to heaping of the concrete and overloading of the steel deck.

                       6.2 Placing concrete

                             6.2.1 Preparation

                                     Prior to placing concrete on the decking, guard rails should be in position at all
                                     perimeters, internal edges and voids. The positions of any props (and back props)
                                     should be checked against the details shown on the decking layout drawings to ensure
                                     that the required support has been provided.

                                 Cleaning the decking

                                     The surface of the decking should be reasonably free of dirt, oil, etc. prior to
                                     concreting. The slight surface grease that is present on the decking when it is delivered
                                     to site does not affect the assumed interaction between the concrete and steel, and
                                     therefore need not be removed. It is not essential to clean out all the broken ceramic
                                     ferrules that result from stud welding.

           98
                  Construction joints

                    Typical pour sizes are up to 1000 m2/day, although there is no technical limitation
                    to the area that may be concreted. Where the limits of the pour do not coincide with
                    permanent slab edges, construction joints (day joints) are used to define the extent of
                    the pour.

                    Where possible, the construction joints should be located close to butt joints in the
                    decking. For conventional composite beams, it is preferable to create the joint to
                    one side of the line of the shear connectors, to ensure sound concrete around the
                    studs. This does not affect the resistance of the shear connectors. If the construction
                    joint cannot be made near a butt joint, it is suggested that no more than one-third
                    of the decking span from a butt joint should be left unpoured, as shown in Figure
                    6.2. Concreting should not be stopped within a sheet length with more than this left
                    unpoured because excessive deflections might occur when the loads on a continuous
                    decking sheet are not balanced either side of the intermediate support beam.

      Figure 6.2
Recommended

   positions for
   construction
    joints in the
  concrete slab

                    Stop ends, usually in the form of timber or plastic inserts, are used to create the
                    construction joints. A number of proprietary products are available for this purpose,
                    which may facilitate formation of the joint. As with all the joints and ends of the
                    decking, they should be checked for potential grout loss.

                    A construction joint will form a discontinuity in the slab, so it is important that
                    continuity reinforcement is provided across the joint. When fibre reinforcement is
                    used, continuity reinforcement in the form of conventional reinforcing bars or a strip
                    of steel fabric will be required at construction joints. The decking supplier should be
                    consulted regarding the continuity reinforcement required in fibre reinforced slabs. The
                    occurrence of cracking in the concrete adjacent to day joints is normal and does not
                    affect the structural performance. If the size of the crack at the construction joint is
                    important, e.g., when brittle finishes are being used, the reinforcement should be sized
                    to control the crack width by the PSD. Alternatively, there are commercial systems for
                    decoupling brittle finishes from the underlying composite concrete slab, and guidance
                    on their use should be sought from the supplier.

                  Bar and fabric (mesh) reinforcement

                    All bar/fabric reinforcement should be properly supported so that it does not become
                    displaced during concreting. Plastic stools, loops or preformed fabric may be used
                    as `chairs'. When plastic channels are used care should be taken to ensure they do

                                                                                                                                                                    99
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­
                          CONCRETE

                                     not induce cracking. Chairs should be robust, because operatives will need to use
                                     the floor as a working platform for themselves and their equipment. In particular, the
                                     handling and movement of concrete-filled pipes during pumping can cause significant
                                     local impacts on the fabric reinforcement. Although a slight depression (up to 15 mm)
                                     of the fabric may occur during concreting, the performance of the slab is not affected
                                     significantly by this. An example of a floor with the reinforcement in place and ready for
                                     casting is shown in Figure 6.3.

                         Figure 6.3
             Decking and fabric

                 reinforcement ­
                ready for casting

                      the concrete
                                              courtesy of SMD
                                     The reinforcement that has been fixed should be checked against the slab
                                     reinforcement drawing. Particular attention should be given to checking any additional
                                     bar reinforcement, such as may be needed around openings, across composite beams
                                     and U-bars for composite edge beams. When installing reinforcement, care must be
                                     taken at edges to ensure restraint straps to the edge trim are not damaged as this may
                                     adversely impact the deflection of the edge trim and the slab edge position achieved.
                                     Alternatives to steel are available for use as reinforcement, for example glass fibre
                                     reinforced polymers may be formed into bars. When considering alternatives their
                                     behaviour should be carefully taken into account as part of the design process.

                                 Fibre reinforcement
                                     Steel fibres may be used as a structural alternative to reinforcing bars, in which case
                                     they are added to the concrete mix at the batching plant, or directly into the mixer on
                                     site. Fibre reinforced concrete can be pumped to elevated floors, as shown in Figure
                                     6.4. When using a fibre reinforcement solution, it is still general practice to use U-bars
                                     on composite edge beams, bar reinforcement around openings in the slab, and fabric
                                     or bar reinforcement at construction joints, or where the composite slab cantilevers
                                     beyond a support. When preparing for concreting, the site team should ensure that any
                                     such bars/fabric are present.

           100
                  Grout loss
                    The decking joints should be closely butted and exposed ends should be `stopped' with
                    proprietary filler pieces to avoid excessive grout loss. Gaps greater than 5 mm should
                    be sealed, but gaps smaller than this do not need any special provision normally.
                    Small gaps may be spray-filled with expanding polyurethane foam. The decking is not
                    designed to give a watertight seal, dirty water and some aggregate fines seepage
                    is to be expected (unless special measures are taken due to specific requirements
                    concerning a soffit, some grout loss is inevitable). Consideration should be made for
                    the provision of power washing activities to the underside of supporting steelwork and
                    decking following concrete pouring.

      Figure 6.4
     Pumping of
fibre-reinforced

        concrete
                         courtesy of SMD

                  Controlling thickness
                    When tamping rails are used they should be placed close to the beam centre-lines, to
                    avoid excessive deflection during concreting. The level of the concrete top surface will
                    then tend to reflect the deflected shape of the beams.
                    `Dipping' is a more effective way to ensure a constant depth of concrete, with a top
                    surface that also follows the deflected shape of the decking.
                  Mass flood technique
                    Where a `mass flood' technique of casting (whereby the concrete is poured and the
                    whole floor levelled to a fixed datum) is used, considerably more concrete will be
                    needed and thicker slabs will result from deflections of the steelwork and decking.
                    Levelling to a fixed datum should not be adopted without first confirming with the PSD
                    that the extra weight of concrete `ponding' has been allowed for in the design. The
                    recommended method of pouring concrete is by constant depth using a depth gauge.
                    For further information see AD 344 and AD 410.

                                                                                                                                                                   101
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­
                          CONCRETE

                             6.2.2 Placement

                                     The concrete should be well compacted, particularly near and around any shear
                                     connectors. This can be done using a vibrating beam, which will require adequate
                                     supports at both ends, or by an immersion poker vibrator. When the latter is used care
                                     must be taken to avoid damaging the decking. Hand tamping is not recommended as a
                                     way of compacting the concrete.

                                     Concrete can be placed when the air temperature is 5°C or above, some will supply if
                                     3°C and rising. In cold weather, it may be necessary to make provision to maintain an
                                     adequate temperature during at least part of the curing period (see below).

                                 Concrete pumping

                                     Pumping has for a long time been the normal way of placing concrete and can be
                                     adopted for both normal and lightweight aggregate mixes. Flow rates in the order of
                                     0.5 to 1 m3 of concrete per minute can be achieved, although, clearly, the longer the
                                     pump lines and the higher the concrete is to be pumped, the slower the operation.
                                     Some pumps can `lift' the concrete up to 50 m. Secondary pumps, placed at
                                     intermediate levels, may be used to achieve higher lifts.

                                     Pump lines are normally 100-150 mm in diameter and are assembled in segments.
                                     Because the force exerted at bends can be significant, straight line pumping is
                                     preferred. The lines should be supported on timber blocks at intervals of 2 to 3 m.
                                     Resetting of pump lines is required at frequent intervals as the pour progresses. This
                                     means that the outlet pipe should be moved frequently and carefully so that concrete
                                     heaping is minimised. A minimum of two operatives is necessary for this operation,
                                     one to hold and manoeuvre the outlet pipe, the other to shovel away excess concrete.
                                     No more than four workers should be present around the pipe outlet during pumping,
                                     because of the potential for overloading the decking. The concrete should not be
                                     dropped from the outlet pipe onto the decking from a height of more than about 1 m.

                                     Any low quality concrete (the first part of each lorry load, or after flushing out pipeline
                                     blockages) should be discarded.

                                 Skip and barrow

                                     Whilst ideally concrete should be placed by pump, there will be occasions when small
                                     areas need to be concreted and placing by pump is not practical. Considerable care is
                                     needed if a skip and barrows are to be used, to ensure the decking is not overloaded.
                                     It would be preferable to discharge concrete into barrows on previously constructed
                                     areas, to avoid concrete being discharged directly from a skip onto decking. Placing
                                     concrete from a skip hung from a crane may be difficult because of obstructions from
                                     beams and decking at higher floor levels. However, despite being time consuming
                                     (progress rates rarely exceed 5 m3 per hour), it is sometimes efficient to use the skip
                                     and barrow technique for small infill bays.

                                     Skips should have a means of controlling the rate of discharge and should not be
                                     discharged from more than 0.5 metres above the decking or barrow. When discharging

           102
into a barrow, the barrow should be supported by thick (30 mm) boards covering a 2
m by 2 m area, or by a finished part of the slab. Either provision limits impact loads.
Barrows should be run over thick boards placed on the fabric reinforcement, which
should be supported locally.

Testing

The concrete should normally be tested in accordance with the requirements of BS
EN 12350-1:2019[87]. Specifications for the required number of concrete cube tests
vary, so the designer should be consulted if there is any lack of clarity. The cubes are
crushed at 28 days, and the average of the cubes' strengths becomes the individual
28-day result for the batch sampled. Additional cubes may be taken for testing at 7
days, or other ages, for the determination of strength.

6.2.3 Finishing, curing and drying

The concrete surface finish is normally specified by the PSD (Section 4.2.1). If power-
floating is to be carried out, this should be done within 2-3 hours of casting. This allows
time for the concrete to sufficiently harden. As discussed in Section 4.1.2, it should be
checked that this load does not exceed the allowable temporary construction loading of
1.5kN/m2 over the 3 m × 3 m `working area', see section 6.3.2 for further information.

Experience shows that there is a high risk that well trowelled surfaces will exhibit
crazing[88]. Crazing is the term used to describe an irregular polygonal pattern of
fine interconnected cracks which often occur on power trowelled concrete surfaces.
Crazing should not be considered a defect and it generally has no adverse effect on the
performance of the floor surface.

Although concrete normally gains strength relatively quickly, it is necessary to keep
temperatures above 5°C for at least 3 days after pouring. When concreting during the
winter months, loss of heat, such as by radiation from the lower surface of the decking
at night, can be significant. It may then be necessary to use space-heaters to maintain
the temperature. Some heat is generated during setting, or `hydration', of the concrete
(this raises the temperature by 3 to 5°C, typically).

The moisture in the concrete should not be allowed to evaporate too early, otherwise
the surface may lose its integrity, forming dust and possibly cracking, and it will not
have a good abrasion resistance. The slab therefore needs to be `cured' either by
spraying with a proprietary curing compound, or by covering the surface with polythene
sheeting for 3 to 7 days, depending on the weather (this is particularly important in
warm or windy weather).

Because the concrete is only exposed on one surface of a composite floor, it can take
longer than a traditional reinforced concrete slab to dry out. The preferred method of
checking the moisture content of the slab is the insulated hygrometer method given
in BS 8203[89].

                                                                                                                                         103
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­
                          CONCRETE

                       6.3 Loads on the slab during and after concreting

                             6.3.1 Loads during concreting

                                     Loads during concreting arise mainly from the weight of the operatives, concrete,
                                     pump-lines and impact forces. Loads to be taken into account for design during
                                     concreting are specified in BS EN 1991-1-6:2005 and in BS 5950-3 and are outlined
                                     in Section 4.1.2. The self-weight of the finished slab (typically 2 to 3 kN/m2) and
                                     local loading (caused by normal localised heaping of the concrete) are included.
                                     This is usually not critical because adjacent areas of decking are unloaded, or only
                                     partially loaded.

                                     The following list describes the loads that usually arise during concreting, and that will
                                     normally have been allowed for by the SSD:

                                      A concrete gang consisting of five or six people (only four of whom are within 2 m
                                          of the pump outlet)

                                      Concrete that is poured from no higher than knee level above the decking (to avoid
                                          excessive impact loading)

                                      A 100-150 mm diameter pipeline full of concrete. The weight of this line should
                                          be adequately spread across the decking by using suitable timbers to avoid local
                                          damage to the deck

                                      A cone of heaped concrete of approximately 0.2 m height and 1 m base. It will
                                          have been assumed that the pump line outlet will be moved frequently to avoid
                                          excessive heaping (or, if a skip is used, the discharge will be carefully controlled).

                                     Additional concrete may be placed because of deflections of both the decking and the
                                     steel frame, particularly if the slab is finished to `absolute' (datum) levels or to achieve
                                     a certain flatness of the upper surface. The SSD must be consulted to confirm whether
                                     the resultant increased loads have been allowed for in the design. Levelling the top of
                                     slab to achieve a uniform thickness, rather than a `level' top surface is recommended
                                     and will avoid this situation.

                             6.3.2 Construction loads after concreting

                                     Construction loads are often applied to the slab soon after concreting. Examples of
                                     commonly occurring loads are power floats, bags of fire protection, skips of debris,
                                     pallets of blocks and other equipment. If these loads are no more than 1.5 kN/m2 (over
                                     a 3 m by 3 m area), the construction load used in the design of the decking, then the
                                     slab is clearly not overloaded (provided there is no additional, unforeseen load due
                                     to `ponding'). For loads greater than this, the concrete strength will need to be relied
                                     upon. Props should not be removed, nor additional loads applied, until the concrete
                                     has reached 75% of its design strength, as indicated by `control' concrete compression
                                     tests. If the slab is to be loaded before 28 days after concreting, its strength at the

           104
time of loading needs to be established (possibly by testing cubes or cylinders early),
and an effective `design strength' agreed with the PSD.

The following list gives some examples of typical construction loads. It may be
necessary to make special provisions to guarantee that the items are placed on pallets,
positioned directly over the support beams. Construction loads should not be applied
to the slab soon after concreting:

 Concrete blocks: a 1 m high pallet of blocks applies a load up to 10 kN/m2. Bricks:
     a 1 m High pallet of bricks can exert a load of over 15 kN/m2

 Bags of fire protection: a bag of fire protection material normally weighs 25 kg. A 1
     m high pallet of bags can be equivalent to a load of 2.5 kN/m2

 Bags of cement: bags of cement weigh 25 kg each. A standard pallet of these
     weighs 1,400 kg (12 kN/m2).

The application of very heavy construction loads should always be referred to the SSD.
When considering the location of such loads, it is best to position them over the beams
wherever possible. Examples of such loads are:

 Generators: welding generators can apply a load of 50 kN
 Fork lift trucks: fork lift trucks can exert a load up to 100 kN, not including their

     live load. In general, vehicles with axle weights above 3 tonnes should be used only
     if the slab has been designed/checked specifically for that purpose
 Crane counter weights: each counter weight is marked clearly with the value of
     its weight
 Mobile access platforms: The potential loading imposed by any mobile access
     platforms used to install services, finishes, etc should be checked.

BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 clause 9.4.3, entitled effective width of composite slabs under
concentrated point and line loads has been the cause of much confusion, in particular
the interpretation of load limits of 7.5 kN and 5.0 kN/m2 quoted in its part 5. The
guidance that `nominal transverse reinforcement may be used without calculation'
(i.e. assumed to be adequate) provided these limits are not exceeded has been widely
misunderstood. AD 450 explains how the designer should consider concentrated
loads in their design, and gives a simple way of determining the transverse bending
moment that should be used to explicitly design the transverse reinforcement in
the beam strip that passes under a load. Even when the load limits stated in BS EN
1994-1-1:2004 are not exceeded, explicit design of this reinforcement may be needed
(for example when there is more than one concentrated load present , or when the
transverse reinforcement is placed relatively high in the slab). AD 477 provides further
guidance on the topic by proposing a more sophisticated approach, as a supplement
rather than a replacement for the approach in AD 450. This more advanced approach
is particularly relevant for the UK market, where typically we rely on a single layer
of reinforcement with a minimal cover to the top surface of the slab, for which the
simplified method proposed by AD 450 may result in an onerous requirement for the
area of reinforcement required to resist transverse bending. Both ADs are considered

                                                                                                                                         105
CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE ­
                          CONCRETE

                                     in SCI's Tedds module which provides a way of optimising the slab design by iteration.
                                     This approach enables the width of the longitudinal strip to be reduced (provided it still
                                     passes the relevant verifications), so that the amount of transverse bending is reduced.
                                     Care is needed if a composite floor is to be used in situations where there could be
                                     frequent vehicle movements. Designing such floors just for uniformly distributed
                                     loads may not be satisfactory. The fatigue effects of the repeated dynamic loading
                                     from vehicles on the slab and supporting beams must be considered by the PSD.
                                     The suitability of the floor design (beams and slab) for dynamic loading from vehicles
                                     should be checked.
                                     Where the concrete is to be used as a wearing surface, or where bonded finishes are
                                     specified, the concrete surface should be protected from oil spillage and damage from
                                     moving plant.

                       6.4 Further reading

                                     The references below relate particularly to this Section. (For information on authors
                                     and publishers, see Section 8, References.)
                                     Good construction practice for composite slabs[90]
                                     This document covers much of the information included in the current guide but has a
                                     bias towards the European market.
                                     Concrete Society Technical Report No. 34, 2018 - Concrete industrial ground floors a
                                     guide to design and construction.
                                     This publication provides comprehensive guidance on the design, specification,
                                     construction and finishing of industrial concrete ground floors. The guidance on
                                     concrete quality requirements for durability, and on finishing procedures, is also
                                     relevant to suspended composite slabs.
                                     Concrete Society Technical Report No. 63, 2007 - Guidance for the design of steel-
                                     fibre-reinforced concrete[40].
                                     This publication summarises the range of applications for steel-fibre-reinforced
                                     concrete and includes practical aspects such as production and quality control.
                                     Concrete Society Technical Report No. 75, 2016 - Composite concrete slabs using
                                     steel decking.
                                     This publication provides guidance for the construction of composite floor slabs on
                                     steel decking and complements the design guidance given in P300.
                                     Additional information concerning concrete may be found at The Concrete Society and
                                     The Concrete Centre.

           106
Advisory Desk
AD 344, Levelling techniques for composite floors. This Note highlights the importance
of considering potential levelling techniques of composite floor slabs in relation to
achieving the specified tolerances and a safe design. Levelling methods are covered
and the issues of pre-cambering, propping of decking, ponding, flatness and design
approaches are discussed.
AD 347, Saw cutting of composite slabs to control cracking. This Note discusses the
issues involved in the use of saw cutting to form crack inducing joints in composite
slabs and to emphasise the risks involved and the care needed in practice.
AD 367, Construction loading for composite slabs - update to P364. This Advisory Desk
Note provides clarification about the different design approaches adopted in worked
examples in SCI publications P359 and P364.

                                                                                                                                         107
108
DEMOUNTABLE
COMPOSITE
CONSTRUCTION
SYSTEMS

Many types of building might have a relatively short life span in their first cycle of use,
but despite this the economic and sustainability benefits of composite construction
can be retained by being able to demount and rebuild the structure with no damage or
loss of performance. Furthermore, the requirements of the circular economy may, in
the future, extend to buildings and their primary structure, so that all buildings should
possess the ability to be adapted and modified over their lives, and potentially their
components should be capable of being reused.

Practical application for the use of demountable construction can be found in:

 Multi-storey car parks, which may need to be demounted and rebuilt depending
     on future uses of the site or in re-planning of the road system, particularly in
     city centres,

 Schools and educational buildings that need to respond to changing educational
     demands, often by being moved and rebuilt on the same site

 Out of town business parks whose office buildings are often standardised in plan
     form and which also have to respond to changing market needs, whilst retaining
     the asset value of the buildings

 `Pop-up' type developments on sites of short-term planning use, particularly in
     urban areas. These developments are often on previously used or brownfield
     sites and so the new development has to minimise its intervention in terms of
     foundations and services

 Industrial buildings subject to high loading on the production and storage areas,
     which should respond to changes in production requirements over time, for
     example by the construction or demounting of intermediate floors. Examples
     of the requirements for more flexible spatial uses are in the chemical and
     process industries.

Composite beams may be designed to be demountable by using various shear
connector systems that can be disconnected from the beams. Different systems, that
may be used in combination with composite floor slabs, are described as follows:

 Bolts with double nuts above/below the beam flange. In this case, the bolts
     are embedded in the concrete and are connected and disconnected from the
     underside of the beam flange, see Figure 7.1a

 Stud shear connectors with threaded ends and with nuts above/below the
     beam flange

                                                                                                                                         109
DEMOUNTABLE COMPOSITE
  CONSTRUCTION SYSTEMS

                                     Friction grip bolts placed in a tightly-fitting cylinder with a bolt below the flange and
                                          tightened from above, see Figure 7.1b

                                     Bolts placed from below the beam flange that are connected to couplers
                                          embedded in the slab, see Figure 7.1c.

              Figure 7.1  a) High-strength structural bolt b) Friction grip bolt     c) Coupler system
             Alternative
          demountable
     shear connection

                 systems

                          While there is a general desire to move towards adaptable and reusable buildings,

                          as part of a circular economy, there are currently few drivers or requirements to

                          encourage this change in design approach. Design for deconstruction will inevitably

                          cost more initially, but whole life costing over two or more building cycles may

                          demonstrate the longer-term economic advantage of this new approach to design.

                          Ideally, the beam and slab are reused in the same configuration, for example, if the

                          building is demounted and rebuilt as a structural entity.

                          Various techniques are proposed by which the beam and slab components in a
                          composite structure may be reused easily:

                           The slab is cut into single span segments of 1.5 m to 2.4 m width and the
                               segments can be reused with the same beams by placing the shear connectors
                               in the pre-existing holes and then grouting the joints between the segments. The
                               4 to 6 mm joint between the segments is sufficient for the grout to be effective
                               in transferring compression forces for composite design in the second cycle.
                               Diaphragm action is reduced by the loss of the fully continuous slab and so it may
                               be necessary to introduce a form of shear key between the segments. Further
                               cycles of use are possible

                           The slab is cut into segments and the segments can be reused with the same
                               beams by placing the shear connectors in the pre-existing holes. A 50 mm
                               concrete topping with light fabric reinforcement is placed on segments to provide
                               a new slab. The composite beam does not rely on compression transfer through
                               the existing segments, unless they are grouted. The self-weight of the slab is
                               increased by 1.2 kN/m2 but the bending resistance and stiffness of the composite
                               section are also increased because the overall depth is increased (by the
                               additional concrete layer). This system has the advantage that diaphragm action is
                               maintained but further cycles of use of the floor slab may not be possible

                           The steel beams can be reused with a new composite slab.

110
                        To facilitate demounting and reuse of the composite slab, pairs of cold formed, steel
                        edge trims are placed along the centreline of the secondary beams to provide a pre-
                        determined cut-line in the slab. These edge trims are similar to those used around the
                        edge of the slab. Two forms of construction are proposed: (i) full depth trims in which
                        the edge trims are equal to the slab depth and so form a discontinuity, and (ii) partial
                        depth trims (see Figure 7.2) where the edge trims are shallower than the slab depth
                        so that fabric reinforcement can be placed over them and the slab is continuous (a
                        minimum of 30 mm top cover is recommended). In this approach, the slab has to be cut
                        along the centre-line of the beam to expose the edge trim and to be able to separate
                        and reuse the slab segments. It was found from tests that the full depth trim may lead
                        to a slight reduction in the characteristic resistance of the shear connectors. Also, it
                        could be subject to damage due to wear if the slab surface is exposed such as in a car
                        park or a factory floor.

           Figure 7.2
Partial depth edge

   trims and U-bar
               details

                        Some adjustments to the beam design process are needed when using demountable
                        shear connectors. For the ultimate limit state two options are proposed in P428[91],
                        (i) a modified plastic method using a factor kflex that takes account of the load-slip
                        relationship and the spacing of the shear connectors, and (ii) an elastic method in which
                        the bending resistance is limited by the design strength of the steel and concrete, and
                        the resistance of the shear connectors. The elastic method takes account of a non-
                        uniform arrangement of shear connectors by use of an equivalent spacing, which means
                        that the shear connector distribution can be optimised for beams with low degrees of
                        shear connection in unpropped construction.
                        It is also recognised that design for the first use should satisfy strict serviceability limits
                        to avoid any permanent deformation that may affect deconstruction and the subsequent
                        cycles of use. In this respect, the end slip should be controlled to a value that ensures
                        that the shear connectors will not experience plastic deformations. New formulae are
                        presented in P428 defining the effective stiffness, elastic section modulus, and end slip
                        of composite beams based on the shear connector stiffness and equivalent spacing.
                        Further information on sustainability of composite flooring systems is given in Composite
                        flooring systems: sustainable construction solutions[92].

                                                                                                                                                                       111
112
REFERENCES

[1] Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2015 (CDM 2015)
[2] MANN, A.

     Safe erection of steel structures,
     The Structural Engineer, Vol. 100 (9), September 2022
[3] Code of Practice for Metal Decking and Stud Welding
     BCSA, 2014
[4] AD 175: Diaphragm action of steel decking during construction.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 3 (4), Aug 1995
[5] Temporary fixing of metal decking.
     Technical, in New Steel Construction, Vol 30 (3), March 2022
[6] BS EN 10346:2015 Continuously hot-dip coated steel flat products for cold forming - technical
     delivery conditions
     BSI
[7] AD 365: Welding of shear studs to galvanized steel beams.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 20 (2), Feb 2012
[8] AD 247: Use of composite construction in an aggressive environment.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 9(2), March 2001
[9] BS EN 1991-1-6:2005 Eurocode 1. Actions on structures. General actions. Actions during
     execution
     BSI
[10] AD 371: Design of cold-formed steel trapezoidal sheeting.
     Technical, in New Steel Construction, Vol 20 (9), Nov/Dec 2012
[11] BS 5950: Structural use of Steelwork in Building:
     BS 5950-1:2000 Structural use of steelwork in building. Code of practice for design. Rolled
     and welded sections
     BS 5950-3-1:1990 Design in composite construction. Code of practice for design of simple
     and continuous composite beams
     BS 5950-4:1994 Structural use of steelwork in building. Code of practice for design of
     composite slabs with profiled steel sheeting

                                                                                                                                         113
           REFERENCES

                                     BS 5950-6:1995 Structural use of steelwork in building. Code of practice for design of light
                                     gauge profiled steel sheeting
                                     BS 5950-8:2003 Code of practice for fire resistant design
                                     BSI

                               [12] BS EN 1991-1-1:2002 Eurocode 1. Actions on structures. General actions. Densities, self-
                                     weight, imposed loads for buildings
                                     BSI

                               [13] AD 346: Design actions during concreting for beams and decking in composite floors
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 18 (6), July 2011

                               [14] AD 367: Construction loading for composite slabs ­ update to P364
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 20 (5), May 2012

                               [15] BS EN 1993-1-3:2006 Eurocode 3. Design of steel structures. General rules. Supplementary
                                     rules for cold-formed members and sheeting
                                     BSI

                               [16] BS EN 1994-1-1:2004 Eurocode 4. Design of composite steel and concrete structures.
                                     General rules and rules for buildings
                                     BSI

                               [17] BS EN 1090-4: 2018 Execution of steel structures and aluminium structures. Technical
                                     requirements for cold-formed structural steel elements and cold-formed structures for roof,
                                     ceiling, floor and wall applications
                                     BSI

                               [18] BS EN 1992-1-1:2004 Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures. General rules and rules for
                                     buildings BSI

                               [19] BS EN 206:2013 Concrete - Specification, performance, production and conformity
                                     BSI

                               [20] BS 8500-1:2015 Concrete - Complementary British Standard to BS EN 206. Part 1: Method of
                                     specifying and guidance for the specifier
                                     BSI.

                               [21] Low carbon concrete ­ what you need to know.
                                     Technical, in New Steel Construction, Vol 29 (10), Nov/Dec 2021

                               [22] BS 8204-2:2003 Screeds, bases and in situ floorings. Concrete wearing surfaces. Code of
                                     practice
                                     BSI

                               [23] Concrete industrial ground floors - A guide to their design and construction. Third Edition
                                     (TR34)
                                     The Concrete Society, 2013

114
[24] AD 163: Provision for water vapour release in composite slabs
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 2 (6), December 1994

[25] BS EN 13670:2009 Execution of concrete structures
     BSI

[26] National Structural Concrete Specification for Building Construction (4th edition)
     CONSTRUCT, 2010

[27] AD 344: Levelling techniques for composite floors
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 18 (4), April 2010

[28] AD 410: Pouring concrete to a constant thickness or to a constant plane
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 25 (8), September 2017

[29] Composite concrete slabs using steel decking: guidance on construction and associated
     design considerations (TR75)
     The Concrete Society, 2016

[30] Surface regularity ­ levelness and flatness (CAS65)
     The Concrete Society, 2022

[31] BS 4483:2005 Steel fabric for the reinforcement of concrete. Specification.
     BSI

[32] BS 4449:2005 Steel for the reinforcement of concrete. Weldable reinforcing steel. Bar, coil
     and decoiled product. Specification.
     BSI

[33] BS 8110-1:1997 Structural use of concrete. Code of practice for design and construction BSI

[34] BS 8666:2020 Scheduling, dimensioning, bending and cutting of steel reinforcement for
     concrete. Specification.
     BSI

[35] AD 461: Anchorage of bars in the troughs of composite slabs.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 29(5), May 2021

[36] BOND, A.J., et al.
     How to Design Concrete Structures using Eurocode 2. Second edition
     The Concrete Centre, 2018

[37] Guidance on the use of macro-synthetic fibre reinforced concrete (TR65)
     The Concrete Society, 2007

[38] BS EN 14889 Fibres for concrete:.
     BS EN 14889-1:2006 Steel fibres. Definitions, specifications and conformity.
     BS EN 14889-2:2006 Polymer fibres. Definitions, specifications and conformity
     BSI

                                                                                                                                         115
           REFERENCES

                               [39] Use of fibre-reinforced concrete in composite slabs.
                                     Technical, in New Steel Construction, Vol 31 (2), Feb 2023

                               [40] Guidance for the design of steel-fibre-reinforced concrete (TR63)
                                     The Concrete Society, 2007

                               [41] AD 450, Resistance of composite slabs to concentrated loads.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 28(9), Oct 2020

                               [42] AD 477, Transverse bending of composite slabs subjected to point loads.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 30(2), Feb 2022

                               [43] Vertical resistance of composite slabs.
                                     Eurocode Nugget 02, vol. 2, Jan 2023
                                     Available from: https://portal.steel-sci.com/documents.html.

                               [44] Cracking in composite/corrugated metal decking floor slabs (CAS13)
                                     The Concrete Society, 2016

                               [45] AD 347, Saw cutting of composite slabs to control cracking.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 18(7), July/Aug 2010

                               [46] JOHNSON, R.P.
                                     Designers' Guide to Eurocode 4: Design of Composite Steel and Concrete Structures, Second
                                     edition
                                     The Institute of Civil Engineers, 2014

                               [47] BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 Eurocode 4. Design of composite steel and concrete structures.
                                     General rules. Structural fire design
                                     BSI

                               [48] NA to BS EN 1994-1-2:2005 UK National Annex to Eurocode 4. Design of composite steel and
                                     concrete structures. General rules. Structural fire. Design
                                     BSI

                               [49] PN005c-GB.
                                     Fire resistance design of composite slabs.
                                     Available from https://portal.steel-sci.com/documents.html.

                               [50] SIMMS, W.I.
                                     Fire resistance design of steel framed buildings (P375)
                                     SCI, 2012.

                               [51] AD 447: Openings in composite slabs
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 28(7), July 2020

                               [52] Backpropping Flat Slabs by Eur Ing Pallett Bsc Eng FICE FCS ­ PFP/136 (23/08/04): Pallett
                                     TemporaryWorks Ltd

116
[53] McKENNA, P.D. and LAWSON, R.M.
     Interfaces: Design of steel framed buildings for service integration (P166)
     SCI, 1997

[54] PD 6697: 2019 Recommendations for the design of masonry structures to BS EN 1996-1-1
     and BS EN 1996-2
     BSI

[55] OGDEN, R.G.
     Interfaces: Curtain wall connections to steel frames (P101)
     SCI, 1992

[56] WAY, A.G. and COUCHMAN, G.H.
     Acoustic Detailing for Steel Construction (P372)
     SCI, 2008

[57] Approved Document E: Resistance to the passage of sound
     The Building Regulations 2010.
     UK Government, 2015

[58] Part E Robust Details Handbook 4th edition
     Robust Details Ltd

[59] SIMMS, W.I. and HUGHS, A.F.
     Composite design of steel framed buildings (P359)
     SCI, 2011

[60] AD 150, Composite floors - wheel loads from forklift trucks
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 1(7), Dec 1993

[61] AD 450, Resistance of composite slabs to concentrated loads.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 28(9), Oct 2020

[62] PN001a-GB.
     Resistance of headed stud shear connectors in transverse sheeting.
     Available from: https://portal.steel-sci.com/documents.html.
     SCI, 2010.

[63] COUCHMAN, G.
     Minimum degree of shear connection rules for UK construction to Eurocode 4 (P405)
     SCI, 2015.

[64] AD 343, Position of reinforcing mesh relative to stud shear connectors in composite slabs.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 18(3), March 2010

[65] LAWSON, R.M.
     Commentary on BS 5950: Part 3: Section 3.1 `Composite Beams' (P078)
     SCI, 1990

                                                                                                                                         117
           REFERENCES

                               [66] BS EN 1993-1-1:2005 Eurocode 3. Design of steel structures. General rules and rules for
                                     buildings
                                     BSI

                               [67] NETHERCOT, D.A. and LAWSON, R.M.
                                     Lateral stability of steel beams and columns (P093)
                                     SCI, 1992

                               [68] BS EN 1990:2002 Eurocode. Basis of structural design
                                     BSI

                               [69] LAWSON, R.M. and HICKS, S.J.
                                     Design of beams with large web openings for services (P355)
                                     SCI, 2011.

                               [70] SMITH, A.L., HICKS, S.J. and DEVINE, P.J.
                                     Design of floors for vibration: A new approach (P354)
                                     SCI, 2007

                               [71] NEWMAN, G.M., ROBINSON, J.T. and BAILEY, C.G.
                                     A new approach to multi-storey steel-framed buildings. Second Edition (P288)
                                     SCI, 2006.

                               [72] Code of Practice for Offsite Applied Thin Film Intumescent Coatings
                                     ASFP, 2010

                               [73] RT1356: Fire Design of Composite Beams With Rectangular and Circular Web Openings
                                     SCI, 2013.

                               [74] BS 476-21:1987 Fire tests on building materials and structures. Methods for determination of
                                     the fire resistance of loadbearing elements of construction
                                     BSI

                               [75] NEWMAN, G.M. and LAWSON, R.M.
                                     Fire resistance of composite beams (P109)
                                     SCI, 1991

                               [76] AD 380, What height of shear stud should be used in Eurocode 4?.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 22 (2), Mar/Apr 2014

                               [77] AD 424, Shear stud length.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 26 (10), Nov/Dec 2018

                               [78] HICKS, S.J.
                                     Strength and ductility of headed stud connectors welded in modern profiled steel sheeting,
                                     The Structural Engineer, Vol. 85(10), May 2007, pp 32-38

                               [79] AD 192, Transverse reinforcement in composite T beams.
                                     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 5 (1), Feb/Mar 1997

                               [80] AD 266, Shear connection in composite beams.

118
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 11 (4), July 2003
[81] AD 437, Curtailment of transverse bar reinforcement in composite beams with steel decking

     designed using Eurocodes
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 28 (2), February 2020
[82] AD 439, Transverse reinforcement in composite beams
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 28 (4), April 2020
[83] AD 362, Headed shear studs - Resistance and minimum degree of shear connection in
     composite beams with decking
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 19 (9), October 2011
[84] Fire protection for structural steel in buildings (5th edition)
     ASFP, 2014.
[85] CIMSTEEL
     Design for Construction (P178)
     SCI, 1997
[86] AD 174, Shear connection along composite edge beams.
     Advisory Desk, in New Steel Construction, Vol 3 (3), June 1995
[87] BS EN 12350-1:2019 Testing fresh concrete. Sampling and common apparatus
     BSI
[88] Crazing: power trowelled concrete for floor slabs (CAS8)
     The Concrete Society, 2003
[89] BS 8203:2017 Installation of resilient floor coverings ­ code of practice
     BSI
[90] Good construction practice for composite slabs
     Publication No. 73, European Convention for Constructional Steelwork
     Technical Committee 7 - Working Group 7.6
     ECCS, 1993
[91] Guidance on Demountable composite construction systems for UK practice (P428)
     SCI, 2020.
[92] Composite flooring systems: sustainable construction solutions
     MCRMA, 2014

                                                                                                                                         119
CREDITS

Front Cover                 16 Severfield
         Kingspan           24 Raised Floor Solutions
                            70 SMD
ii  Composite Profiles UK   96 Severfield
                            108 Severfield
iv Pro-deck Fixing          112 Severfield

vi Raised Floor Solutions

viii Composite Profiles UK

6   SMD
     COMPOSITE SLABS AND BEAMS USING STEEL DECKING:
     GOOD PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

     This revised edition reflects the latest guidance for good practice and gives information on design
     to the Eurocodes as well as design to BS 5950, including comments on changes that will be
     incorporated in the second generation of Eurocodes. Information on the specification and use
     of low carbon concrete has been added as well as a new chapter on demountable composite
     construction systems.

     Complementary titles

     P428 | Guidance on demountable  P359 | Composite design of steel
     composite construction systems  framed buildings
     for UK practice

     SCI Ref: P300, 3rd Edition

     SCI

     Silwood Park, Ascot, Berkshire. SL5 7QN UK

122  T: +44 (0)1344 636525
     F: +44 (0)1344 636570

     E: reception@steel-sci.com

     www.steel-sci.com
